                                     February 8, 1996




                                                              CIRCULAR NO. A-130
                                                                     Revised     
                                                 (Transmittal Memorandum No. 3)

MEMORANDUM FOR HEADS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND ESTABLISHMENTS

SUBJECT:  Management of Federal Information Resources

    Circular No. A-130 provides uniform government-wide information resources
management policies as required by the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, as
amended by the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35.  This
Transmittal Memorandum contains updated guidance on the "Security of Federal
Automated Information Systems," Appendix III and makes minor technical
revisions to the Circular to reflect the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (P.L.
104-13).  The Circular is reprinted in its entirety for convenience.





                                          Alice M. Rivlin
                                          Director

Attachment


CIRCULAR NO. A-130
Revised     
(Transmittal Memorandum No. 3)


MEMORANDUM FOR HEADS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND ESTABLISHMENTS

SUBJECT:  Management of Federal Information Resources

  1.  Purpose:  This Circular establishes policy for the management of Federal
information resources.  Procedural and analytic guidelines for implementing
specific aspects of these policies are included as appendices.

  2.  Rescissions:  This Circular rescinds OMB Circulars No. A-3, A-71, A-90,
A-108, A-114, and A-121, and all Transmittal Memoranda to those circulars.

  3.  Authorities:  This Circular is issued pursuant to the Paperwork
Reduction Act (PRA) of 1980, as amended by the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995
(44 U.S.C. Chapter 35); the Privacy Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. 552a); the Chief
Financial Officers Act (31 U.S.C. 3512 et seq.); the Federal Property and
Administrative Services Act, as amended (40 U.S.C. 759 and 487); the Computer
Security Act (40 U.S.C. 759 note); the Budget and Accounting Act, as amended
(31 U.S.C. Chapter 11); Executive Order No. 12046 of March 27, 1978; and
Executive Order No. 12472 of April 3, 1984.

  4.  Applicability and Scope:

    a.  The policies in this Circular apply to the information activities of
all agencies of the executive branch of the Federal government.

    b.  Information classified for national security purposes should also be
handled in accordance with the appropriate national security directives. 
National security emergency preparedness activities should be conducted in
accordance with Executive Order No. 12472.

  5.  Background:  The Paperwork Reduction Act establishes a broad mandate for
agencies to perform their information resources management activities in an
efficient, effective, and economical manner.  To assist agencies in an
integrated approach to information resources management, the Act requires that
the Director of OMB develop and implement uniform and consistent information
resources management policies; oversee the development and promote the use of
information management principles, standards, and guidelines; evaluate agency
information resources management practices in order to determine their
adequacy and efficiency; and determine compliance of such practices with the
policies, principles, standards, and guidelines promulgated by the Director.

  6.  Definitions:

    a.  The term "agency" means any executive department, military department,
government corporation, government controlled corporation, or other
establishment in the executive branch of the Federal government, or any
independent regulatory agency.  Within the Executive Office of the President,
the term includes only OMB and the Office of Administration.

    b.  The term "audiovisual production" means a unified presentation,
developed according to a plan or script, containing visual imagery, sound or
both, and used to convey information.

    c.  The term "dissemination" means the government initiated distribution of
information to the public.  Not considered dissemination within the meaning of
this Circular is distribution limited to government employees or agency
contractors or grantees, intra- or inter-agency use or sharing of government
information, and responses to requests for agency records under the Freedom of
Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) or Privacy Act.

    d.  The term "full costs," when applied to the expenses incurred in the
operation of an information processing service organization (IPSO), is
comprised of all direct, indirect, general, and administrative costs incurred
in the operation of an IPSO.  These costs include, but are not limited to,
personnel, equipment, software, supplies, contracted services from private
sector providers, space occupancy, intra-agency services from within the
agency, inter-agency services from other Federal agencies, other services that
are provided by State and local governments, and Judicial and Legislative
branch organizations. 

    e.  The term "government information" means information created, collected,
processed, disseminated, or disposed of by or for the Federal Government.

    f.  The term "government publication" means information which is published
as an individual document at government expense, or as required by law.  (44
U.S.C. 1901)

    g.  The term "information" means any communication or representation of
knowledge such as facts, data, or opinions in any medium or form, including
textual, numerical, graphic, cartographic, narrative, or audiovisual forms.

    h.  The term "information dissemination product" means any book, paper,
map, machine-readable material, audiovisual production, or other documentary
material, regardless of physical form or characteristic, disseminated by an
agency to the public.

    i.  The term "information life cycle" means the stages through which
information passes, typically characterized as creation or collection,
processing, dissemination, use, storage, and disposition.

    j.  The term "information management" means the planning, budgeting,
manipulating, and controlling of information throughout its life cycle.

    k.  The term "information resources" includes both government information
and information technology.

    l.  The term "information processing services organization" (IPSO) means a
discrete set of personnel, information technology, and support equipment with
the primary function of providing services to more than one agency on a
reimbursable basis. 

    m.  The term "information resources management" means the process of
managing information resources to accomplish agency missions.  The term
encompasses both information itself and the related resources, such as
personnel, equipment, funds, and information technology.

    n.  The term "information system" means a discrete set of information
resources organized for the collection, processing, maintenance, transmission,
and dissemination of information, in accordance with defined procedures,
whether automated or manual.

    o.  The term "information system life cycle" means the phases through which
an information system passes, typically characterized as initiation,
development, operation, and termination.

    p.  The term "information technology" means the hardware and software
operated by a Federal agency or by a contractor of a Federal agency or other
organization that processes information on behalf of the Federal government to
accomplish a Federal function, regardless of the technology involved, whether
computers, telecommunications, or others.  It includes automatic data
processing equipment as that term is defined in Section 111(a)(2) of the
Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949.  For the purposes of
this Circular, automatic data processing and telecommunications activities
related to certain critical national security missions, as defined in 44
U.S.C. 3502(2) and 10 U.S.C. 2315, are excluded.

    q.  The term "major information system" means an information system that
requires special management attention because of its importance to an agency
mission; its high development, operating, or maintenance costs; or its
significant role in the administration of agency programs, finances, property,
or other resources.

    r.  The term "records" means all books, papers, maps, photographs,
machine-readable materials, or other documentary materials, regardless of
physical form or characteristics, made or received by an agency of the United
States Government under Federal law or in connection with the transaction of
public business and preserved or appropriate for preservation by that agency
or its legitimate successor as evidence of the organization, functions,
policies, decisions, procedures, operations, or other activities of the
government or because of the informational value of the data in them.  Library
and museum material made or acquired and preserved solely for reference or
exhibition purposes, extra copies of documents preserved only for convenience
of reference, and stocks of publications and of processed documents are not
included. (44 U.S.C. 3301)

    s.  The term "records management" means the planning, controlling,
directing, organizing, training, promoting, and other managerial activities
involved with respect to records creation, records maintenance and use, and
records disposition in order to achieve adequate and proper documentation of
the policies and transactions of the Federal Government and effective and
economical management of agency operations.  (44 U.S.C. 2901(2))

    t.  The term "service recipient" means an agency organizational unit,
programmatic entity, or chargeable account that receives information
processing services from an information processing service organization
(IPSO).  A service recipient may be either internal or external to the
organization responsible for providing information resources services, but
normally does not report either to the manager or director of the IPSO or to
the same immediate supervisor.

  7.  Basic Considerations and Assumptions:

    a.  The Federal Government is the largest single producer, collector,
consumer, and disseminator of information in the United States.  Because of
the extent of the government's information activities, and the dependence of
those activities upon public cooperation, the management of Federal
information resources is an issue of continuing importance to all Federal
agencies, State and local governments, and the public.

    b.  Government information is a valuable national resource.  It provides
the public with knowledge of the government, society, and economy -- past,
present, and future.  It is a means to ensure the accountability of
government, to manage the government's operations, to maintain the healthy
performance of the economy, and is itself a commodity in the marketplace.

    c.  The free flow of information between the government and the public is
essential to a democratic society. It is also essential that the government
minimize the Federal paperwork burden on the public, minimize the cost of its
information activities, and maximize the usefulness of government information.

    d.  In order to minimize the cost and maximize the usefulness of government
information, the expected public and private benefits derived from government
information should exceed the public and private costs of the information,
recognizing that the benefits to be derived from government information may
not always be quantifiable.

    e.  The nation can benefit from government information disseminated both by
Federal agencies and by diverse nonfederal parties, including State and local
government agencies, educational and other not-for-profit institutions, and
for-profit organizations.

    f.  Because the public disclosure of government information is essential to
the operation of a democracy, the management of Federal information resources
should protect the public's right of access to government information.

    g.  The individual's right to privacy must be protected in Federal
Government information activities involving personal information.

    h.  Systematic attention to the management of government records is an
essential component of sound public resources management which ensures public
accountability.  Together with records preservation, it protects the
government's historical record and guards the legal and financial rights of
the government and the public.

    i.  Agency strategic planning can improve the operation of government
programs.  The application of information resources should support an agency's
strategic plan to fulfill its mission.  The integration of IRM planning with
agency strategic planning promotes the appropriate application of Federal
information resources.

    j.  Because State and local governments are important producers of
government information for many areas such as health, social welfare, labor,
transportation, and education, the Federal Government must cooperate with
these governments in the management of information resources.

    k.  The open and efficient exchange of scientific and technical government
information, subject to applicable national security controls and the
proprietary rights of others, fosters excellence in scientific research and
effective use of Federal research and development funds.

    l.  Information technology is not an end in itself.  It is one set of
resources that can improve the effectiveness and efficiency of Federal program
delivery.

    m.  Federal Government information resources management policies and
activities can affect, and be affected by, the information policies and
activities of other nations.

    n.  Users of Federal information resources must have skills, knowledge, and
training to manage information resources, enabling the Federal government to
effectively serve the public through automated means.

    o.  The application of up-to-date information technology presents
opportunities to promote fundamental changes in agency structures, work
processes, and ways of interacting with the public that improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of Federal agencies. 

    p.  The availability of government information in diverse media, including
electronic formats, permits agencies and the public greater flexibility in
using the information.

    q.  Federal managers with program delivery responsibilities should
recognize the importance of information resources management to mission
performance.

  8.  Policy:

    a.  Information Management Policy

    (1)  Information Management Planning.  Agencies shall plan in an integrated
manner for managing information throughout its life cycle.  Agencies shall:

    (a)  Consider, at each stage of the information life cycle, the effects of
decisions and actions on other stages of the life cycle, particularly those
concerning information dissemination;

    (b)  Consider the effects of their actions on members of the public and
ensure consultation with the public as appropriate;

    (c)  Consider the effects of their actions on State and local governments
and ensure consultation with those governments as appropriate;

    (d)  Seek to satisfy new information needs through interagency or
intergovernmental sharing of information, or through commercial sources, where
appropriate, before creating or collecting new information;

    (e)  Integrate planning for information systems with plans for resource
allocation and use, including budgeting, acquisition, and use of information
technology;

    (f)  Train personnel in skills appropriate to management of information;

    (g)  Protect government information commensurate with the risk and
magnitude of harm that could result from the loss, misuse, or unauthorized
access to or modification of such information;

    (h)  Use voluntary standards and Federal Information Processing Standards
where appropriate or required;

    (i)  Consider the effects of their actions on the privacy rights of
individuals, and ensure that appropriate legal and technical safeguards are
implemented;

    (j)  Record, preserve, and make accessible sufficient information to ensure
the management and accountability of agency programs, and to protect the legal
and financial rights of the Federal Government;

    (k)  Incorporate records management and archival functions into the design,
development, and implementation of information systems;

    (l)  Provide for public access to records where required or appropriate.

    (2)  Information Collection.  Agencies shall collect or create only that
information necessary for the proper performance of agency functions and which
has practical utility.

    (3)  Electronic Information Collection.  Agencies shall use electronic
collection techniques where such techniques reduce burden on the public,
increase efficiency of government programs, reduce costs to the government and
the public, and/or provide better service to the public.  Conditions favorable
to electronic collection include:

    (a)  The information collection seeks a large volume of  data and/or
reaches a large proportion of the public;

    (b)  The information collection recurs frequently;

    (c)  The structure, format, and/or definition of the information sought by
the information collection does not change significantly over several years;

    (d)  The agency routinely converts the information collected to electronic
format;

    (e)  A substantial number of the affected public are known to have ready
access to the necessary information technology and to maintain the information
in electronic form; 

    (f)  Conversion to electronic reporting, if mandatory, will not impose
substantial costs or other adverse effects on the public, especially State and
local governments and small business entities.

    (4)  Records Management.  Agencies shall:

    (a)  Ensure that records management programs provide adequate and proper
documentation of agency activities;

    (b)  Ensure the ability to access records regardless of form or medium;

    (c)  In a timely fashion, establish, and obtain the approval of the
Archivist of the United States for, retention schedules for Federal records;
and

    (d)  Provide  training and guidance as appropriate to all agency officials
and employees and contractors regarding their Federal records management
responsibilities.

    (5)  Providing Information to the Public.  Agencies have a responsibility
to provide information to the public consistent with their missions.  Agencies
shall discharge this responsibility by:

    (a)  Providing information, as required by law, describing agency
organization, activities, programs, meetings, systems of records, and other
information holdings, and how the public may gain access to agency information
resources;

    (b)  Providing access to agency records under provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act and the Privacy Act, subject to the protections and
limitations provided for in these Acts; 

    (c)  Providing such other information as is necessary or appropriate for
the proper performance of agency functions; and

    (d)  In determining whether and how to disseminate information to the
public, agencies shall:

       (i)  Disseminate information in a manner that achieves the best balance
between the goals of maximizing the usefulness of the information and
minimizing the cost to the government and the public;

       (ii)  Disseminate information dissemination products on equitable and
timely terms;

       (iii)  Take advantage of all dissemination channels, Federal and
nonfederal, including State and local governments, libraries and private
sector entities, in discharging agency information dissemination
responsibilities;

       (iv) Help the public locate government information maintained by or for
the agency.

    (6)  Information Dissemination Management System.  Agencies shall maintain
and implement a management system for all information dissemination products
which shall, at a minimum:

    (a)  Assure that information dissemination products are necessary for
proper performance of agency functions (44 U.S.C. 1108);

    (b)  Consider whether an information dissemination product available from
other Federal or nonfederal sources is equivalent to an agency information
dissemination product and reasonably fulfills the dissemination
responsibilities of the agency;

    (c)  Establish and maintain inventories of all agency information
dissemination products;

    (d)  Develop such other aids to locating agency information dissemination
products including catalogs and directories, as may reasonably achieve agency
information dissemination objectives;

    (e)  Identify in information dissemination products the source of the
information, if from another agency;

    (f)  Ensure that members of the public with disabilities whom the agency
has a responsibility to inform have a reasonable ability to access the
information dissemination products;

    (g)  Ensure that government publications are made available to depository
libraries through the facilities of the Government Printing Office, as
required by law (44 U.S.C. Part 19);

    (h)  Provide electronic information dissemination products to the
Government Printing Office for distribution to depository libraries;

    (i)  Establish and maintain communications with members of the public and
with State and local governments so that the agency creates information
dissemination products that meet their respective needs;

    (j)  Provide adequate notice when initiating, substantially modifying, or
terminating significant information dissemination products; and

    (k)  Ensure that, to the extent existing information dissemination policies
or practices are inconsistent with the requirements of this Circular, a prompt
and orderly transition to compliance with the requirements of this Circular is
made.

    (7)  Avoiding Improperly Restrictive Practices.  Agencies shall:

    (a)  Avoid establishing, or permitting others to establish on their behalf,
exclusive, restricted, or other distribution arrangements that interfere with
the availability of information dissemination products on a timely and
equitable basis;

    (b)  Avoid establishing restrictions or regulations, including the charging
of fees or royalties, on the reuse, resale, or redissemination of Federal
information dissemination products by the public; and,

    (c)  Set user charges for information dissemination products at a level
sufficient to recover the cost of dissemination but no higher.  They shall
exclude from calculation of the charges costs associated with original
collection and processing of the information.  Exceptions to this policy are:

       (i)  Where statutory requirements are at variance with the policy;

       (ii)  Where the agency collects, processes, and disseminates the
    information for the benefit of a specific identifiable group beyond the
    benefit to the general public;

       (iii)  Where the agency plans to establish user charges at less than
    cost of dissemination because of a determination that higher charges would
    constitute a significant barrier to properly performing the agency's
    functions, including reaching members of the public whom the agency has a
    responsibility to inform; or

       (iv)  Where the Director of OMB determines an exception is warranted.

    (8)   Electronic Information Dissemination.  Agencies shall use electronic
media and formats, including public networks, as appropriate and within
budgetary constraints, in order to make government information more easily
accessible and useful to the public.  The use of electronic media and formats
for information dissemination is appropriate under the following conditions:

    (a)  The agency develops and maintains the information electronically;

    (b)  Electronic media or formats are practical and cost effective ways to
provide public access to a large, highly detailed volume of information;

    (c)  The agency disseminates the product frequently;

    (d)  The agency knows a substantial portion of users have ready access to
the necessary information technology and training to use electronic
information dissemination products;

    (e)  A change to electronic dissemination, as the sole means of
disseminating the product, will not impose substantial acquisition or training
costs on users, especially State and local governments and small business
entities.

    (9)  Safeguards.  Agencies shall:

    (a)  Ensure that information is protected commensurate with the risk and
magnitude of the harm that would result from the loss, misuse, or unauthorized
access to or modification of such information;

    (b)  Limit the collection of information which identifies individuals to
that which is legally authorized and necessary for the proper performance of
agency functions;

    (c)  Limit the sharing of information that identifies individuals or
contains proprietary information to that which is legally authorized, and
impose appropriate conditions on use where a continuing obligation to ensure
the confidentiality of the information exists;

    (d)  Provide individuals, upon request, access to records about them
maintained in Privacy Act systems of records, and permit them to amend such
records as are in error consistent with the provisions of the Privacy Act.
    b. Information Systems and Information Technology Management

    (1) Evaluation and Performance Measurement.  Agencies shall promote the
appropriate application of Federal information resources as follows:  

    (a) Seek opportunities to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
government programs through work process redesign and the judicious
application of information technology;

    (b) Prepare, and update as necessary throughout the information system life
cycle, a benefit-cost analysis for each information system: 

       (i) at a level of detail appropriate to the size of the investment;

       (ii) consistent with the methodology described in OMB Circular No. A-94,
    "Guidelines and Discount Rates for Benefit-Cost Analysis of Federal
    Programs;" and

       (iii) that relies on systematic measures of mission performance,
    including the:

                     (a) effectiveness of program delivery;
                     (b) efficiency of program administration; and
                     (c) reduction in burden, including information collection
       burden, imposed on the public;

    (c) Conduct benefit-cost analyses to support ongoing management oversight
processes that maximize return on investment and minimize financial and
operational risk for investments in major information systems on an agency-
wide basis; and

    (d) Conduct post-implementation reviews of information systems to validate
estimated benefits and document effective management practices for broader
use.

    (2) Strategic Information Resources Management (IRM) Planning.  Agencies
shall establish and maintain strategic information resources management
planning processes which include the following components:

    (a) Strategic IRM planning that addresses how the management of information
resources promotes the fulfillment of an agency's mission.  This planning
process should support the development and maintenance of a strategic IRM plan
that reflects and anticipates changes in the agency's mission, policy
direction, technological capabilities, or resource levels;

    (b) Information planning that promotes the use of information throughout
its life cycle to maximize the usefulness of information, minimize the burden
on the public, and preserve the appropriate integrity, availability, and
confidentiality of information.  It shall specifically address the planning
and budgeting for the information collection burden imposed on the public as
defined by 5 C.F.R. 1320;

    (c) Operational information technology planning that links information
technology to anticipated program and mission needs, reflects budget
constraints, and forms the basis for budget requests.  This planning should
result in the preparation and maintenance of an up-to-date five-year plan, as
required by 44 U.S.C. 3506, which includes:

       (i) a listing of existing and planned major information systems;

       (ii) a listing of planned information technology acquisitions;

       (iii) an explanation of how the listed major information systems and
    planned information technology acquisitions relate to each other and
    support the achievement of the agency's mission; and

       iv) a summary of computer security planning, as required by Section 6 of
    the Computer Security Act of 1987 (40 U.S.C. 759 note); and
    
    (d)  Coordination with other agency planning processes including strategic,
human resources, and financial resources. 

    (3) Information Systems Management Oversight.  Agencies shall establish
information system management oversight mechanisms that:

    (a) Ensure that each information system meets agency mission requirements; 

    (b) Provide for periodic review of information systems to determine:

       (i) how mission requirements might have changed;

       (ii) whether the information system continues to fulfill ongoing and
    anticipated mission requirements; and

       (iii) what level of maintenance is needed to ensure the information
    system meets mission requirements cost effectively;
                     
    (c) Ensure that the official who administers a program supported by an
information system is responsible and accountable for the management of that
information system throughout its life cycle;

    (d) Provide for the appropriate training for users of Federal information
resources;

    (e) Prescribe Federal information system requirements that do not unduly
restrict the prerogatives of State, local, and tribal governments;

    (f) Ensure that major information systems proceed in a timely fashion
towards agreed-upon milestones in an information system life cycle, meet user
requirements, and deliver intended benefits to the agency and affected publics
through coordinated decision making about the information, human, financial,
and other supporting resources;  and

    (g) Ensure that financial management systems conform to the requirements of
OMB Circular No. A-127, "Financial Management Systems."

    (4) Use of Information Resources.  Agencies shall create and maintain
management and technical frameworks for using information resources that
document linkages between mission needs, information content, and information
technology capabilities.  These frameworks should guide both strategic and
operational IRM planning.  They should also address steps necessary to create
an open systems environment.  Agencies shall implement the following
principles:   

    (a) Develop information systems in a manner that facilitates necessary
interoperability, application portability, and scalability of computerized
applications across networks of heterogeneous hardware, software, and
communications platforms;

    (b) Ensure that improvements to existing information systems and the
development of planned information systems do not unnecessarily duplicate
information systems available within the same agency, from other agencies, or
from the private sector;

    (c) Share available information systems with other agencies to the extent
practicable and legally permissible;

    (d) Meet information technology needs through intra-agency and inter-agency
sharing, when it is cost effective, before acquiring new information
technology resources;

    (e) For Information Processing Service Organizations (IPSOs) that have
costs in excess of $5 million per year, agencies shall:  

       (i) account for the full costs of operating all IPSOs;

       (ii) recover the costs incurred for providing IPSO services to all
    service recipients on an equitable basis commensurate with the costs
    required to provide those services; and

       (iii) document sharing agreements between service recipients and IPSOs;
    and

    (f) Establish a level of security for all information systems that is
commensurate with the risk and magnitude of the harm resulting from the loss,
misuse, or unauthorized access to or modification of the information contained
in these information systems.


    (5) Acquisition of Information Technology.  Agencies shall:

    (a) Acquire information technology in a manner that makes use of full and
open competition and that maximizes return on investment;

    (b) Acquire off-the-shelf software from commercial sources, unless the cost
effectiveness of developing custom software to meet mission needs is clear and
has been documented;

    (c) Acquire information technology in accordance with OMB Circular No. A-
109, "Acquisition of Major Systems," where appropriate; and

    (d) Acquire information technology in a manner that considers the need for
accommodations of accessibility for individuals with disabilities to the
extent that needs for such access exist.

    9.  Assignment of Responsibilities:

    a. All Federal Agencies.  The head of each agency shall:

    (1)  Have primary responsibility for managing agency information resources;

    (2)  Ensure that the information policies, principles, standards,
guidelines, rules, and regulations prescribed by OMB are implemented
appropriately within the agency;

    (3)  Develop internal agency information policies and procedures and
oversee, evaluate, and otherwise periodically review agency information
resources management activities for conformity with the policies set forth in
this Circular;

    (4)  Develop agency policies and procedures that provide for timely
acquisition of required information technology;

    (5)  Maintain an inventory of the agencies' major information systems,
holdings and information dissemination products, as required by 44 U.S.C.
3511.

    (6) Implement and enforce applicable records management policies and
procedures, including requirements for archiving information maintained in
electronic format, particularly in the planning, design and operation of
information systems.

    (7)  Identify to the Director, OMB, statutory, regulatory, and other
impediments to efficient management of Federal information resources and
recommend to the Director legislation, policies, procedures, and other
guidance to improve such management;

    (8)  Assist OMB in the performance of its functions under the PRA including
making services, personnel, and facilities available to OMB for this purpose
to the extent practicable;
    
    (9)  Appoint a senior official, as required by 44 U.S.C. 3506(a), who shall
report directly to the agency head to carry out the responsibilities of the
agency under the PRA.  The head of the agency shall keep the Director, OMB,
advised as to the name, title, authority, responsibilities, and organizational
resources of the senior official.  For purposes of this paragraph, military
departments and the Office of the Secretary of Defense may each appoint one
official.

    (10)  Direct the senior official appointed pursuant to 44 U.S.C. 3506(a) to
monitor agency compliance with the policies, procedures, and guidance in this
Circular.  Acting as an ombudsman, the senior official shall consider alleged
instances of agency failure to comply with this Circular and recommend or take
corrective action as appropriate.  The senior official shall report annually,
not later than February 1st of each year, to the Director those instances of
alleged failure to comply with this Circular and their resolution.

    b.  Department of State.  The Secretary of State shall:

    (1)  Advise the Director, OMB, on the development of United States
positions and policies on international information policy issues affecting
Federal Government information activities and ensure that such positions and
policies are consistent with Federal information resources management policy;

    (2)  Ensure, in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, that the
United States is represented in the development of international information
technology standards, and advise the Director, OMB, of such activities. 

    c.  Department of Commerce.  The Secretary of Commerce shall:

    (1)  Develop and issue Federal Information Processing Standards and
guidelines necessary to ensure the efficient and effective acquisition,
management, security, and use of information technology;

    (2)  Advise the Director, OMB, on the development of policies relating to
the procurement and management of Federal telecommunications resources;
 
    (3)  Provide OMB and the agencies with scientific and technical advisory
services relating to the development and use of information technology;

    (4)  Conduct studies and evaluations concerning telecommunications
technology, and concerning the improvement, expansion, testing, operation, and
use of Federal telecommunications systems and advise the Director, OMB, and
appropriate agencies of the recommendations that result from such studies;

    (5)  Develop, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Director
of OMB, plans, policies, and programs relating to international
telecommunications issues affecting government information activities; 

    (6)  Identify needs for standardization of telecommunications and
information processing technology, and develop standards, in consultation with
the Secretary of Defense and the Administrator of General Services, to ensure
efficient application of such technology;

    (7)  Ensure that the Federal Government is represented in the development
of national and, in consultation with the Secretary of State, international
information technology standards, and advise the Director, OMB, of such
activities.
 
    d.  Department of Defense.  The Secretary of Defense shall develop, in
consultation with the Administrator of General Services, uniform Federal
telecommunications standards and guidelines to ensure national security,
emergency preparedness, and continuity of government.

    e.  General Services Administration.  The Administrator of General Services
shall:

    (1)  Advise the Director, OMB, and agency heads on matters affecting the
procurement of information technology;

    (2)  Coordinate and, when required, provide for the purchase, lease, and
maintenance of information technology required by Federal agencies;

    (3)  Develop criteria for timely procurement of information technology and
delegate procurement authority to agencies that comply with the criteria;

    (4)  Provide guidelines and regulations for Federal agencies, as authorized
by law, on the acquisition, maintenance, and disposition of information
technology, and for implementation of Federal Information Processing
Standards;

    (5)  Develop policies and guidelines that facilitate the sharing of
information technology among agencies as required by this Circular;

    (6)  Manage the Information Technology Fund in accordance with the Federal
Property and Administrative Services Act as amended;

    f.  Office of Personnel Management.  The Director, Office of Personnel
Management, shall:

    (1)  Develop and conduct training programs for Federal personnel on
information resources management including end-user computing;

    (2)  Evaluate periodically future personnel management and staffing
requirements for Federal information resources management;

    (3)  Establish personnel security policies and develop training programs
for Federal personnel associated with the design, operation, or maintenance of
information systems.

    g.  National Archives and Records Administration.  The Archivist of the
United States shall:

    (1)  Administer the Federal records management program in accordance with
the National Archives and Records Act;

    (2)  Assist the Director, OMB, in developing standards and guidelines
relating to the records management program.

    h.  Office of Management and Budget.  The Director of the Office of
Management and Budget shall:

    (1)  Provide overall leadership and coordination of Federal information
resources management within the executive branch;             

    (2)  Serve as the President's principal adviser on procurement and
management of Federal telecommunications  systems, and develop and establish
policies for procurement and management of such systems;

    (3)  Issue policies, procedures, and guidelines to assist agencies in
achieving integrated, effective, and efficient information resources
management;

    (4)  Initiate and review proposals for changes in legislation, regulations,
and agency procedures to improve Federal information resources management;

    (5)  Review and approve or disapprove agency proposals for collection of
information from the public, as defined by 5 CFR 1320.3;

    (6)  Develop and maintain a Governmentwide strategic plan for information
resources management.

    (7)  Evaluate agencies' information resources management and identify
cross-cutting information policy issues through the review of agency
information programs, information collection budgets, information technology
acquisition plans, fiscal budgets, and by other means;
    (8)  Provide policy oversight for the Federal records management function
conducted by the National Archives and Records Administration, coordinate
records management policies and programs with other information activities,
and review compliance by agencies with records management requirements;

    (9)  Review agencies' policies, practices, and programs pertaining to the
security, protection, sharing, and disclosure of information, in order to
ensure compliance, with respect to privacy and security, with the Privacy Act,
the Freedom of Information Act, the Computer Security Act and related
statutes;

    (10)  Resolve information technology procurement disputes between agencies
and the General Services Administration pursuant to Section 111 of the Federal
Property and Administrative Services Act;

    (11)  Review proposed U.S. Government Position and Policy statements on
international issues affecting Federal Government information activities and
advise the Secretary of State as to their consistency with Federal information
resources management policy.

    (12)  Coordinate the development and review by the Office of Information
and Regulatory Affairs of policy associated with Federal procurement and
acquisition of information technology with the Office of Federal Procurement
Policy.
  
  10.  Oversight:

    a.  The Director, OMB, will use information technology planning reviews,
fiscal budget reviews, information collection budget reviews, management
reviews, and such other measures as the Director deems necessary to evaluate
the adequacy and efficiency of each agency's information resources management
and compliance with this Circular.

    b.  The Director, OMB, may, consistent with statute and upon written
request of an agency, grant a waiver from particular requirements of this
Circular.  Requests for waivers must detail the reasons why a particular
waiver is sought, identify the duration of the waiver sought, and include a
plan for the prompt and orderly transition to full compliance with the
requirements of this Circular.  Notice of each waiver request shall be
published promptly by the agency in the Federal Register, with a copy of the
waiver request made available to the public on request.

  11.  Effectiveness:  This Circular is effective upon issuance.  Nothing in
this Circular shall be construed to confer a private right of action on any
person.

  12.  Inquiries:  All questions or inquiries should be addressed to the
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget,
Washington, D.C.  20503.  Telephone:  (202) 395-3785.
  13.  Sunset Review Date:  OMB will review this Circular three years from the
date of issuance to ascertain its effectiveness.
Appendix I to OMB Circular No. A-130 - Federal Agency Responsibilities for
Maintaining Records About Individuals

1.  Purpose and Scope.

This Appendix describes agency responsibilities for implementing the reporting
and publication requirements of the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 552a, as
amended (hereinafter "the Act").  It applies to all agencies subject to the
Act.  Note that this Appendix does not rescind other guidance OMB has issued
to help agencies interpret the Privacy Act's provisions, e.g., Privacy Act
Guidelines (40 FR 28949-28978, July 9, 1975), or Final Guidance for Conducting
Matching Programs (54 FR at 25819, June 19, 1989).

2.  Definitions.

a.  The terms "agency," "individual," "maintain," þmatching program,þ
"record," "system of records," and "routine use," as used in this Appendix,
are defined in the Act (5 U.S.C. 552a(a)). 

b.  Matching Agency.  Generally, the Recipient Federal agency (or the Federal
source agency in a match conducted by a nonfederal agency) is the matching
agency and is responsible for meeting the reporting and publication
requirements associated with the matching program.  However, in large, multi-
agency matching programs, where the recipient agency is merely performing the
matches and the benefit accrues to the source agencies, the partners should
assign responsibility for compliance with the administrative requirements in a
fair and reasonable way.  This may mean having the matching agency carry out
these requirements for all parties, having one participant designated to do
so, or having each source agency do so for its own matching program(s).

c.  Nonfederal Agency.  Nonfederal agencies are State or local governmental
agencies receiving or providing records in a matching program with a Federal
agency. 

d.  Recipient Agency.  Recipient agencies are Federal agencies or their
contractors receiving automated records from the Privacy Act systems of
records of other Federal agencies, or from State or local governments, to be
used in a matching program as defined in the Act.

e.  Source Agency.  A source agency is a Federal agency that discloses
automated records from a system of records to another Federal agency or to a
State or local agency to be used in a matching program.  It is also a State or
local agency that  discloses records to a Federal agency for use in a matching
program. 

3.  Assignment of Responsibilities.

a.  All Federal Agencies.  In addition to meeting the agency requirements
contained in the Act and the specific reporting and publication requirements
detailed in this Appendix, the head of each agency shall ensure that the
following reviews are conducted as often as specified below, and be prepared
to report to the Director, OMB, the results of such reviews and the corrective
action taken to resolve problems uncovered.  The head of each agency shall:

(1)  Section (m) Contracts.  Review every two years a random sample of agency
contracts that provide for the maintenance of a system of records on behalf of
the agency to accomplish an agency function, in order to ensure that the
wording of each contract makes the provisions of the Act binding on the
contractor and his or her employees.  (See 5 U.S.C. 552a(m)(1))

(2)  Recordkeeping Practices.  Review biennially agency recordkeeping and
disposal policies and practices in order to assure compliance with the Act,
paying particular attention to the maintenance of automated records.

(3)  Routine Use Disclosures.  Review every four years the routine use
disclosures associated with each system of records in order to ensure that the
recipient's use of such records continues to be compatible with the purpose
for which the disclosing agency collected the information. 

(4)  Exemption of Systems of Records.  Review every four years each system of
records for which the agency has promulgated exemption rules pursuant to
Section (j) or (k) of the Act in order to determine whether such exemption is
still needed.

(5)  Matching Programs.  Review annually each ongoing matching program in
which the agency has participated during the year in order to ensure that the
requirements of the Act, the OMB guidance, and any agency regulations,
operating instructions, or guidelines have been met.

(6)  Privacy Act Training.  Review biennially agency training practices in
order to ensure that all agency personnel are familiar with the requirements
of the Act, with the agency's implementing regulation, and with any special
requirements of their specific jobs.

(7)  Violations.  Review biennially the actions of agency personnel that have
resulted either in the agency being found civilly liable under Section (g) of
the Act, or an employee being found criminally liable under the provisions of
Section (i) of the Act, in order to determine the extent of the problem, and
to find the most effective way to prevent recurrence of the problem.

(8)  Systems of Records Notices.  Review biennially each system of records
notice to ensure that it accurately describes the system of records.  Where
minor changes are needed, e.g., the name of the system manager, ensure that an
amended notice is published in the Federal Register.  Agencies may choose to
make one annual comprehensive publication consolidating such minor changes. 
This requirement is distinguished from and in addition to the requirement to
report to OMB and Congress significant changes to systems of records and to
publish those changes in the Federal Register (See paragraph 4c of this
Appendix).

b.  Department of Commerce.  The Secretary of Commerce shall, consistent with
guidelines issued by the Director, OMB, develop and issue standards and
guidelines for ensuring the security of information protected by the Act in
automated information systems.

c.  The Department of Defense, General Services Administration, and National
Aeronautics and Space Administration.  These agencies shall, consistent with
guidelines issued by the Director, OMB, ensure that instructions are issued on
what agencies must do in order to comply with the requirements of Section (m)
of the Act when contracting for the operation of a system of records to
accomplish an agency purpose.

d.  Office of Personnel Management.  The Director of the Office of Personnel
Management shall, consistent with guidelines issued by the Director, OMB:

(1)  Develop and maintain government-wide standards and procedures for
civilian personnel information processing and recordkeeping directives to
assure conformance with the Act.

(2)  Develop and conduct Privacy Act training programs for agency personnel,
including both the conduct of courses in various substantive areas (e.g.,
administrative, information technology) and the development of materials that
agencies can use in their own courses.  The assignment of this responsibility
to OPM does not affect the responsibility of individual agency heads for
developing and conducting training programs tailored to the specific needs of
their own personnel.

e.  National Archives and Records Administration.  The Archivist of the United
States through the Office of the Federal Register, shall, consistent with
guidelines issued by the Director, OMB:

(1)  Issue instructions on the format of the agency notices and rules required
to be published under the Act.

(2)  Compile and publish every two years, the rules  promulgated under 5
U.S.C. 552a(f) and agency notices published under 5 U.S.C. 552a(e)(4) in a
form available to the public at low cost.

(3)  Issue procedures governing the transfer of records to Federal Records
Centers for storage, processing, and servicing pursuant to 44 U.S.C. 3103. 
For purposes of the Act, such records are considered to be maintained by the
agency that deposited them.  The Archivist may disclose deposited records only
according to the access rules established by the agency that deposited them.

f.  Office of Management and Budget.  The Director of the Office of Management
and Budget will:

    (1)  Issue guidelines and directives to the agencies to implement the Act.

    (2)  Assist the agencies, at their request, in implementing their Privacy
Act programs.

    (3)  Review new and altered system of records and matching program reports
submitted pursuant to Section (o) of the Act.

    (4)  Compile the biennial report of the President to Congress in accordance
with Section (s) of the Act.

    (5)  Compile and issue a biennial report on the agencies' implementation of
the computer matching provisions of the Privacy Act, pursuant to Section
(u)(6) of the Act.
4.  Reporting Requirements.  The Privacy Act requires agencies to  make the
following kinds of reports:

=========================================================================================
|Report				| When Due				| Recipient**	|
|-------------------------------+---------------------------------------+---------------|
|Biennial Privacy Act		| June 30, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002	| Administrator,|
|Report				|					| OIRA		|
|-------------------------------+---------------------------------------+---------------|
|Biennial Matching Activity	| June 30, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002	| Administrator,|
|Report				|					| OIRA		|
|-------------------------------+---------------------------------------+---------------|
|New System of Records		| When establishing a system of 	| Administrator,|	
|Report				| records - at least 40 days before	| OIRA,		|
|				| operating the system*			| Congress	|
|-------------------------------+---------------------------------------+---------------|
|Altered System of Records	| When adding a new routine use,	| Administrator,|
|Report				| exemption, or otherwise		| OIRA,		|
|				| significantly altering an existing	| Congress	|
|				| system of records - at least 40 days	|		|
|				| before change to system takes place*	|		|
|-------------------------------+---------------------------------------+---------------|
|New Matching Program 		| When establishing a new matching	| Administrator,|
|Report				| program - at least 40 days before	| OIRA,		|
|				| operating the program*		| Congress	|
|-------------------------------+---------------------------------------+---------------|
|Renewal of Existing Matching	| At least 40 days prior to		| Administrator,|
|Program			| expiration of any one year		| OIRA,		|
|				| extension of the original program	| Congress	|
|				| - treat as a new program		|		|
|-------------------------------+---------------------------------------+---------------|
|Altered Matching Program	| When making a significant change	| Administrator,|
|				| to an existing matching program -	| OIRA,		|
|				| at least 40 days before operating 	| Congress	|
|				| an altered program*			|		|
|-------------------------------+---------------------------------------+---------------|
|Matching Agreements		| At least  40 days prior to the	| Congress	|
|				| start of a matching program*		|		|
|========================================================================================

*  Review Period: Note that the statutory reporting requirement is 30 days
prior; the additional ten days will ensure that OMB and Congress have
sufficient time to review the proposal.  Agencies should therefore ensure that
reports are mailed expeditiously after being signed.

** Recipient Addresses: At bottom of envelope print "PRIVACY ACT REPORT"

House of Representatives:  
The Chair of the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight, 2157
RHOB, Washington, D.C. 20515-6143.

Senate: 
The Chair of the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, 340 SDOB,
Washington, D.C. 20510-6250.
Office of Management and Budget:  
The Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office
of Management and Budget, ATTN: Docket Library, NEOB Room 10012, Washington,
D.C. 20503. 

    a.  Biennial Privacy Act Report.  To provide the necessary information for
the biennial report of the President, agencies shall submit a biennial report
to OMB, covering their Privacy Act activities for the calendar years covered
by the reporting period.  The exact format of the report will be established
by OMB.  At a minimum, however, agencies should collect and be prepared to
report the following data on a calendar year basis:

       (1)  A listing of publication activity during the year showing the
following:

* Total Number of Systems of Records (Exempt/NonExempt)
* Number of New Systems of Records Added (Exempt/NonExempt)
* Number Routine Uses Added
* Number Exemptions Added to Existing Systems
* Number Exemptions Deleted from Existing Systems
* Total Number of Automated Systems of Records (Exempt/NonExempt)

The agency should provide a brief narrative describing those activities in
detail, e.g., "the Department added a (k)(1) exemption to an existing system
of records entitled "Investigative Records of the Office of Investigations;"
or "the agency added a new routine use to a system of records entitled
"Employee Health Records" that would permit disclosure of health data to
researchers under contract to the agency to perform workplace risk analysis."

       (2)  A brief description of any public comments received on agency
publication and implementation activities, and agency response.

       (3)  Number of access and amendment requests from record subjects citing
the Privacy Act that were received during the calendar year of the report. 
Also the disposition of requests from any year that were completed during the
calendar year of the report: 

*  Total Number of Access Requests
Number Granted in Whole
Number Granted in Part
Number Wholly Denied
Number For Which No Record Found
*  Total Amendment Requests
Number Granted in Whole
Number Granted in Part
Number Wholly Denied
*  Number of Appeals of Denials of Access
Number Granted in Whole
Number Granted in Part
Number Wholly Denied
Number For Which No Record Found
*  Number of Appeals of Denials of Amendment
Number Granted in Whole
Number Granted in Part
Number Wholly Denied

       (4)  Number of instances in which individuals brought suit under section
(g) of the Privacy Act against the agency and the results of any such
litigation that resulted in a change to agency practices or affected guidance
issued by OMB.

       (5)  Results of the reviews undertaken in response to paragraph 3a of
this Appendix.

       (6)  Description of agency Privacy Act training activities conducted in
accordance with paragraph 3a(6) of this Appendix.

    b.  Biennial Matching Activity Report (See 5 U.S.C. 552a(u)(3)(D)).  At the
end of each calendar year, the Data Integrity Board of each agency that has
participated in a matching program will collect data summarizing that year's
matching activity.  The Act requires that such activity be reported every two
years.  OMB will establish the exact format of the report, but agencies' Data
Integrity Boards should be prepared to report the data identified below both
to the agency head and to OMB:

       (1)  A listing of the names and positions of the members of the Data
Integrity Board and showing separately the name of the Board Secretary, his or
her agency mailing address, and telephone number. Also show and explain any
changes in membership or structure occurring during the reporting year.

       (2)  A listing of each matching program, by title and purpose, in which
the agency participated during the reporting year.  This listing should show
names of participant agencies, give a brief description of the program, and
give a page citation and the date of the Federal Register notice describing
the program.

       (3)  For each matching program, an indication of whether the
cost/benefit analysis performed resulted in a favorable ratio.  The Data
Integrity Board should explain why the agency proceeded with any matching
program for which an unfavorable ratio was reached. 

       (4)  For each program for which the Board waived a cost/benefit
analysis, the reasons for the waiver and the results of the match, if
tabulated.

       (5)  A description of any matching agreement the Board rejected and an
explanation of the rejection.

       (6)  A listing of any violations of matching agreements that have been
alleged or identified, and a discussion of any action taken.

       (7)  A discussion of any litigation involving the agency's participation
in any matching program.

       (8)  For any litigation based on allegations of inaccurate records, an
explanation of the steps the agency used to ensure the integrity of its data
as well as the verification process it used in the matching program, including
an assessment of the adequacy of each.

    c.  New and Altered System of Records Report.  The Act requires agencies to
publish notices in the Federal Register describing new or altered systems of
records, and to submit reports to OMB, and to the Chair of the Committee on
Government Reform and Oversight of the House of Representatives, and the Chair
of the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate. The reports must be
transmitted at least 40 days prior to the operation of the new system of
records or the date on which the alteration to an existing system takes place.

       (1) Which Alterations Require a Report.  Minor changes to systems of
records need not be reported.  For example, a change in the designation of the
system manager due to a reorganization would not require a report, so long as
an individual's ability to gain access to his or her records is not affected. 
Other examples include changing applicable safeguards as a result of a risk
analysis or deleting a routine use when there is no longer a need for the
disclosure.  The following changes are those for which a report is required:

                     (a)  A significant increase in the number, type, or category
of individuals about whom records are maintained.  For example, a system
covering physicians that has been expanded to include other types of health
care providers, e.g., nurses, technicians, etc., would require a report. 
Increases attributable to normal growth should not be reported.

                     (b)  A change that expands the types or categories of
information maintained.  For example, a benefit system which originally
included only earned income information that has been expanded to include
unearned income information.

                     (c)  A change that alters the purpose for which the
information is used.

                     (d)  A change to equipment configuration (either hardware or
software) that creates substantially greater access to the records in the
system of records.  For example, locating interactive terminals at regional
offices for accessing a system formerly accessible only at the headquarters
would require a report.

                     (e)  The addition of an exemption pursuant to Section (j) or
(k) of the Act.   Note that, in examining a rulemaking for a Privacy Act
exemption as part of a report of a new or altered system of records, OMB will
also review the rule under applicable regulatory review procedures and
agencies need not make a separate submission for that purpose.

                     (f)  The addition of a routine use pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
552a(b)(3).

       (2)  Reporting Changes to Multiple Systems of Records.  When an agency
makes a change to an information technology installation or a
telecommunication network, or makes any other general changes in information
collection, processing, dissemination, or storage that affect multiple systems
of records, it may submit a single, consolidated report, with changes to
existing notices and supporting documentation included in the submission.

       (3)  Contents of the New or Altered System Report.  The report for a new
or altered system has three elements:  a transmittal letter, a narrative
statement, and supporting documentation.

                     (a)  Transmittal Letter.  The transmittal letter should be
signed by the senior agency official responsible for implementation of the Act
within the agency and should contain the name and telephone number of the
individual who can best answer questions about the system of records.  The
letter should contain the agency's assurance that the proposed system does not
duplicate any existing agency or government-wide systems of records.  The
letter sent to OMB may also include a request for waiver of the time period
for the review.   The agency should indicate why it cannot meet the
established review period and the consequences of not obtaining the waiver. 
(See paragraph 4e below.)  There is no prescribed format for the letter.

                     (b)  Narrative Statement.  There is also no prescribed
format for the narrative statement, but it should be brief.  It should make
reference, as appropriate, to information in the supporting documentation
rather than restating such information.  The statement should:

                            1.  Describe the purpose for which the agency is
establishing the system of records.

                            2.  Identify the authority under which the system of
records is maintained.  The agency should avoid citing housekeeping statutes,
but rather cite the underlying programmatic authority for collecting,
maintaining, and using the information.  When the system is being operated to
support an agency housekeeping program, e.g., a carpool locator, the agency
may, however, cite a general housekeeping statute that authorizes the agency
head to keep such records as necessary.

                            3.  Provide the agency's evaluation of the probable or
potential effect of the proposal on the privacy of individuals.

                            4.  Provide a brief description of the steps taken by
the agency to minimize the risk of unauthorized access to the system of
records.  A more detailed assessment of the risks and specific administrative,
technical, procedural, and physical safeguards established shall be made
available to OMB upon request.

                            5.  Explain how each proposed routine use satisfies
the compatibility requirement of subsection (a)(7) of the Act.  For altered
systems, this requirement pertains only to any newly proposed routine use.

                            6.  Provide OMB Control Numbers, expiration dates, and
titles of any information collection requests (e.g., forms, surveys, etc.)
contained in the system of records and approved by OMB under the Paperwork
Reduction Act.    If the request for OMB clearance of an information
collection is pending, the agency may simply state the title of the collection
and the date it was submitted for OMB clearance.

                     (c)  Supporting Documentation.  Attach the following to all
new or altered system of records reports:

                            1.  A copy of the new or altered system of records
notice  consistent with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552a(e)(4).  The notice
must appear in the format  prescribed by the Office of the Federal Registerþs
Document Drafting Handbook.  For proposed altered systems the agency should
supply a copy of the original system of records notice to ensure that
reviewers can understand the changes proposed.  If the sole change to an
existing system of records is to add a routine use, the agency should either
republish the entire system of records notice, a condensed description of the
system of records, or a citation to the last full text Federal Register
publication.

                            2.  A copy in Federal Register format of any new
exemption rules or changes to published rules (consistent with the provisions
of 5 U.S.C. 552a(f),(j), or (k)) that the agency proposes to issue for the new
or altered system.  

       (4)  OMB Review.  OMB will review reports under 5 U.S.C. 552a(r) and
provide comments if appropriate.  Agencies may assume that OMB concurs in the
Privacy Act aspects of their proposal if OMB has not commented within 40 days
from the date the transmittal letter was signed.  Agencies should ensure that
letters are transmitted expeditiously after they are signed.  

       (5) Timing of Systems of Records Reports.  Agencies may publish system
of records and routine use notices as well as proposed exemption rules in the
Federal Register at the same time that they send the new or altered system
report to OMB and Congress.  The period for OMB and congressional review and
the notice and comment period for routine uses and exemptions will then run
concurrently.  Note that exemptions must be published as final rules before
they are effective.

    d.  New or Altered Matching Program Report.  The Act requires agencies to
publish notices in the Federal Register describing new or altered matching
programs, and to submit reports to OMB, and to Congress.  The report must be
received at least 40 days prior to the initiation of any matching activity
carried out under a new or substantially altered matching program.  For
renewals of continuing programs, the report must be dated at least 40 days
prior to the expiration of any existing matching agreement.

       (1)  When to Report Altered Matching Programs.  Agencies need not report
minor changes to matching programs.  The term "minor change to a matching
program" means a change that does not significantly alter the terms of the
agreement under which the program is being carried out.  Examples of
significant changes include: 

                     (a)  Changing the purpose for which the program was
established.

                     (b)  Changing the matching population, either by including
new categories of record subjects or by greatly increasing the numbers of
records matched.

                     (c)  Changing the legal authority covering the matching
program.

                     (d)  Changing the source or recipient agencies involved in
the matching program.
    
       (2) Contents of New or Altered Matching Program Report.   The report for
a new or altered matching program has three elements:  a transmittal letter, a
narrative statement, and supporting documentation that includes a copy of the
proposed Federal Register notice. 

                     (a)  Transmittal Letter.  The transmittal letter should be
signed by the senior agency official responsible for implementation of the
Privacy Act within the agency and should contain the name and telephone number
of the individual who can best answer questions about the matching program. 
The letter should state that a copy of the matching agreement has been
distributed to Congress as the Act requires.  The letter to OMB may also
include a request for waiver of the review time period.  (See 4e below.)

                     (b)  Narrative Statement.  There is no prescribed format for
the narrative statement, but it should be brief.  It should make reference, as
appropriate, to information in the supporting documentation rather than
restating such information.  The statement should provide:

                            1.  A description of the purpose of the matching
program and the authority under which it is being carried out.
       
                            2.  A description of the security safeguards used to
protect against any unauthorized access or disclosure of records used in the
match.

                            3.  If the cost/benefit analysis required by Section
(u)(4)(A) indicated an unfavorable ratio or was waived pursuant to OMB
guidance, an explanation of the basis on which the agency justifies conducting
the match.

                     (c) Supporting Documentation.  Attach the following:

                            1.  A copy of the Federal Register notice describing
the matching program.  The notice must appear in the format prescribed by the
Office of the Federal Registerþs Document Drafting Handbook.  (See 5b (3).)

                            2.  For the Congressional report only, a copy of the
matching agreement.

       (3)  OMB Review.  OMB will review reports under 5 U.S.C. 552a(r) and
provide comments if appropriate.  Agencies may assume that OMB concurs in the
Privacy Act aspects of their proposal if OMB has not commented within 40 days
from the date the transmittal letter was signed.  

       (4) Timing of Matching Program Reports.  Agencies should ensure that
letters are transmitted expeditiously after they are signed. Agencies may
publish matching program notices in the Federal Register at the same time that
they send the matching program report to OMB and Congress.  The period for OMB
and congressional review and the notice and comment period will then run
concurrently.

    e.  Expedited Review.  The Director, OMB, may grant a waiver of the 40-day
review period for either systems of records or matching program reviews.  The
agency must ask for the waiver in the transmittal letter and demonstrate
compelling reasons.  When a waiver is granted, the agency is not thereby
relieved of any other requirement of the Act.  If no waiver is granted,
agencies may presume concurrence at the expiration of the 40 day review period
if OMB has not commented by that time.  Note that OMB cannot waive time
periods specifically established by the Act such as the 30 days notice and
comment period required for the adoption of a routine use proposal pursuant to
Section (b)(3) of the Act. 

5.  Publication Requirements.  The Privacy Act requires agencies to publish
notices or rules in the Federal Register in the following circumstances:  when
adopting a new or altered system of records, when adopting a routine use, when
adopting an exemption for a system of records, or when proposing to carry out
a new or altered matching program.  (See paragraph 4c(1) and 4d(1) above on
what constitutes an alteration requiring a report to OMB and the Congress.)

    a.  Publishing New or Altered Systems of Records Notices and Exemption
Rules.

       (1)  Who Publishes.  The agency responsible for operating the system of
records makes the necessary publication.  Publication should be carried out at
the departmental or agency level.  Even where a system of records is to be
operated exclusively by a component, the department rather than the component
should publish the notice.  Thus, for example, the Department of the Treasury
would publish a system of records notice covering a system operated
exclusively by the Internal Revenue Service.  Note that if the agency is
proposing to exempt the system under Section (j) or (k) of the Act, it must
publish a rule in addition to the system of records notice.

                     (a)  Government-wide Systems of Records.  Certain agencies
publish systems of records containing records for which they have government-
wide responsibilities.  The records may be located in other agencies, but they
are being used under the authority of and in conformance with the rules
mandated by the publishing agency.  The Office of Personnel Management, for
example, has published a number of government-wide systems of records relating
to the operation of the government's personnel program.  Agencies should not
publish systems of records that wholly or partly duplicate existing
government-wide systems of records.

                     (b)  Section (m) Contract Provisions.  When an agency
provides by contract for the operation of a system of records, it should
ensure that a system of records notice describing the system has been
published.  It should also review the notice to ensure that it contains a
routine use under Section (e)(4)(D) of the Act permitting disclosure to the
contractor and his or her personnel.

       (2)  When to Publish. 

                     (a)  System Notice.  The system of records notice  must
appear in the Federal Register before the agency begins to operate the system,
e.g., collect and use the information. 

                     (b)  Routine Use.  A routine use must be published in the
Federal Register 30 days before the agency discloses records pursuant to its
terms.   (Note that the addition of a routine use to an existing system of
records requires a report to OMB and Congress, and that the review period for
this report is 40 days.)

                     (c)  Exemption Rule.  A rule exempting a system of records
under (j) or (k) or the Act must be established through informal rulemaking
pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act.  This process generally requires
publication of a proposed rule, a period during which the public may comment,
publication of a final rule, and the adoption of the final rule.  Agencies may
not withhold records under an exemption until these requirements have been
met. 

       (3)  Format.  Agencies should follow the publication format contained in
the Office of the Federal Register's Document Drafting Handbook which may be
obtained from the Government Printing Office.

    b.  Publishing Matching Notices.

       (1)  Who Publishes.  Generally, the recipient Federal agency  (or the
Federal source agency in a match conducted by a nonfederal agency) is
responsible for publishing in the Federal Register a notice describing the new
or altered matching program.  However, in large, multi-agency matching
programs, where the recipient agency is merely performing the matches, and the
benefit accrues to the source agencies, the partners should assign
responsibility for compliance with the administrative requirements in a fair
and reasonable way.  This may mean having the matching agency carry out these
requirements for all parties, having one participant designated to do so, or
having each source agency do so for its own matching program(s). 

       (2)  Timing.  Publication must occur at least 30 days prior to the
initiation of any matching activity carried out under a new or substantially
altered matching program.  For renewals of programs agencies wish to continue
past the 30 month period of initial eligibility (i.e., the initial 18 months
plus a one year extension), publication must occur at least 30 days prior to
the expiration of the existing matching agreement.  (But note that a report to
OMB and the Congress is also required with a 40 day review period).

       (3)  Format.  The matching notice shall be in the format prescribed by
the Office of the Federal Register's Document Drafting Handbook and contain
the following information:

                     (a)  The name of the Recipient Agency.
 
                     (b)  The Name(s) of the Source Agencies.

                     (c)  The beginning and ending dates of the match.

                     (d)  A brief description of the matching program, including
its purpose; the legal authorities authorizing its operation;  categories of
individuals involved; and identification of records used, including name(s) of
Privacy Act Systems of  records.

                     (e)  The identification, address, and telephone number of a
Recipient Agency official who will answer public inquiries about the program.


Appendix II to OMB Circular No. A-130 - Cost Accounting, Cost Recovery, and
Interagency Sharing of Information Technology Facilities [ The guidance
formerly found in Appendix II has been revised and placed in Section 8b.  See,
Transmittal No. 2, 59 FR 37906.  Appendix II has been deleted and is reserved
for future topics.]





Appendix III to OMB Circular No. A-130 - Security of Federal Automated
Information Resources

A. Requirements.

1. Purpose

This Appendix establishes a minimum set of controls to be included in Federal
automated information security programs; assigns Federal agency
responsibilities for the security of automated information; and links agency
automated information security programs and agency management control systems
established in accordance with OMB Circular No. A-123.  The Appendix revises
procedures formerly contained in Appendix III to OMB Circular No. A-130 (50 FR
52730; December 24, 1985), and incorporates requirements of the Computer
Security Act of 1987 (P.L. 100-235) and responsibilities assigned in
applicable national security directives.

2. Definitions

The term:

    a. "adequate security" means security commensurate with the risk and
    magnitude of the harm resulting from the loss, misuse, or unauthorized
    access to or modification of information.  This includes assuring that
    systems and applications used by the agency operate effectively and provide
    appropriate confidentiality, integrity, and availability, through the use
    of cost-effective management, personnel, operational, and technical
    controls.

    b. "application" means the use of information resources (information and
    information technology) to satisfy a specific set of user requirements.

    c. "general support system" or "system" means an interconnected set of
    information resources under the same direct management control which shares
    common functionality.  A system normally includes hardware, software,
    information, data, applications, communications, and people.  A system can
    be, for example, a local area network (LAN) including smart terminals that
    supports a branch office, an agency-wide backbone, a communications
    network, a departmental data processing center including its operating
    system and utilities, a tactical radio network, or a shared information
    processing service organization (IPSO).

    d. "major application" means an application that requires special attention
    to security due to the risk and magnitude of the harm resulting from the
    loss, misuse, or unauthorized access to or modification of the information
    in the application.  Note:  All Federal applications require some level of
    protection.  Certain applications, because of the information in them,
    however, require special management oversight and should be treated as
    major.  Adequate security for other applications should be provided by
    security of the systems in which they operate.

3. Automated Information Security Programs.  Agencies shall implement and
maintain a program to assure that adequate security is provided for all agency
information collected, processed, transmitted, stored, or disseminated in
general support systems and major applications. 

Each agency's program shall implement policies, standards and procedures which
are consistent with government-wide policies, standards, and procedures issued
by the Office of Management and Budget, the Department of Commerce, the
General Services Administration and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). 
Different or more stringent requirements for securing national security
information should be incorporated into agency programs as required by
appropriate national security directives.  At a minimum, agency programs shall
include the following controls in their general support systems and major
applications:

    a. Controls for general support systems.

       1) Assign Responsibility for Security.  Assign responsibility for
       security in each system to an individual knowledgeable in the
       information technology used in the system and in providing security for
       such technology.

       2) System Security Plan.  Plan for adequate security of each general
       support system as part of the organization's information resources
       management (IRM) planning process.  The security plan shall be
       consistent with guidance issued by the National Institute of Standards
       and Technology (NIST).  Independent advice and comment on the security
       plan shall be solicited prior to the plan's implementation.  A summary
       of the security plans shall be incorporated into the strategic IRM plan
       required by the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. Chapter 35) and
       Section 8(b) of this circular.  Security plans shall include:

                     a) Rules of the System.  Establish a set of rules of
                     behavior concerning use of, security in, and the acceptable
                     level of risk for, the system.  The rules shall be based on
                     the needs of the various users of the system.  The security
                     required by the rules shall be only as stringent as
                     necessary to provide adequate security for information in
                     the system.  Such rules shall clearly delineate
                     responsibilities and expected behavior of all individuals
                     with access to the system.  They shall also include
                     appropriate limits on interconnections to other systems and
                     shall define service provision and restoration priorities. 
                     Finally, they shall be clear about the consequences of
                     behavior not consistent with the rules.

                     b) Training.  Ensure that all individuals are appropriately
                     trained in how to fulfill their security responsibilities
                     before allowing them access to the system.  Such training
                     shall assure that employees are versed in the rules of the
                     system, be consistent with guidance issued by NIST and OPM,
                     and apprise them about available assistance and technical
                     security products and techniques.  Behavior consistent with
                     the rules of the system and periodic refresher training
                     shall be required for continued access to the system.

                     c) Personnel Controls.  Screen individuals who are
                     authorized to bypass significant technical and operational
                     security controls of the system commensurate with the risk
                     and magnitude of harm they could cause.  Such screening
                     shall occur prior to an individual being authorized to
                     bypass controls and periodically thereafter.

                     d) Incident Response Capability.  Ensure that there is a
                     capability to provide help to users when a security incident
                     occurs in the system and to share information concerning
                     common vulnerabilities and threats.  This capability shall
                     share information with other organizations, consistent with
                     NIST coordination, and should assist the agency in pursuing
                     appropriate legal action, consistent with Department of
                     Justice guidance.

                     e) Continuity of Support.  Establish and periodically test
                     the capability to continue providing service within a system
                     based upon the needs and priorities of the participants of
                     the system.

                     f) Technical Security.  Ensure that cost-effective security
                     products and techniques are appropriately used within the
                     system.

                     g) System Interconnection.  Obtain written management
                     authorization, based upon the acceptance of risk to the
                     system, prior to connecting with other systems.  Where
                     connection is authorized, controls shall be established
                     which are consistent with the rules of the system and in
                     accordance with guidance from NIST.

       3) Review of Security Controls.  Review the security controls in each
       system when significant modifications are made to the system, but at
       least every three years.  The scope and frequency of the review should
       be commensurate with the acceptable level of risk for the system. 
       Depending on the potential risk and magnitude of harm that could occur,
       consider identifying a deficiency pursuant to OMB Circular No. A-123,
       "Management Accountability and Control" and the Federal Managers'
       Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA), if there is no assignment of security
       responsibility, no security plan, or no authorization to process for a
       system.

       4) Authorize Processing.  Ensure that a management official authorizes
       in writing the use of each general support system based on
       implementation of its security plan before beginning or significantly
       changing processing in the system.  Use of the system shall be re-
       authorized at least every three years.

    b. Controls for Major Applications.

       1) Assign Responsibility for Security.  Assign responsibility for
       security of each major application to a management official
       knowledgeable in the nature of the information and process supported by
       the application and in the management, personnel, operational, and
       technical controls used to protect it.  This official shall assure that
       effective security products and techniques are appropriately used in the
       application and shall be contacted when a security incident occurs
       concerning the application. 

       2) Application Security Plan.  Plan for the adequate security of each
       major application, taking into account the security of all systems in
       which the application will operate.  The plan shall be consistent with
       guidance issued by NIST.  Advice and comment on the plan shall be
       solicited from the official responsible for security in the primary
       system in which the application will operate prior to the plan's
       implementation.  A summary of the security plans shall be incorporated
       into the strategic IRM plan required by the Paperwork Reduction Act. 
       Application security plans shall include:

                     a)  Application Rules.  Establish a set of rules concerning
                     use of and behavior within the application.  The rules shall
                     be as stringent as necessary to provide adequate security
                     for the application and the information in it.  Such rules
                     shall clearly delineate responsibilities and expected
                     behavior of all individuals with access to the application. 
                     In addition, the rules shall be clear about the consequences
                     of behavior not consistent with the rules.

                     b)  Specialized Training.  Before allowing individuals
                     access to the application, ensure that all individuals
                     receive specialized training focused on their
                     responsibilities and the application rules.  This may be in
                     addition to the training required for access to a system. 
                     Such training may vary from a notification at the time of
                     access (e.g., for members of the public using an information
                     retrieval application) to formal training (e.g., for an
                     employee that works with a high-risk application).  

                     c) Personnel Security.  Incorporate controls such as
                     separation of duties, least privilege and individual
                     accountability into the application and application rules as
                     appropriate.  In cases where such controls cannot adequately
                     protect the application or information in it, screen
                     individuals commensurate with the risk and magnitude of the
                     harm they could cause.  Such screening shall be done prior
                     to the individuals' being authorized to access the
                     application and periodically thereafter.

                     d) Contingency Planning.  Establish and periodically test
                     the capability to perform the agency function supported by
                     the application in the event of failure of its automated
                     support.

                     e) Technical Controls.  Ensure that appropriate security
                     controls are specified, designed into, tested, and accepted
                     in the application in accordance with appropriate guidance
                     issued by NIST.

                     f) Information Sharing.  Ensure that information shared from
                     the application is protected appropriately, comparable to
                     the protection provided when information is within the
                     application. 

                     g) Public Access Controls.  Where an agency's application
                     promotes or permits public access, additional security
                     controls shall be added to protect the integrity of the
                     application and the confidence the public has in the
                     application.  Such controls shall include segregating
                     information made directly accessible to the public from
                     official agency records.

       3) Review of Application Controls.  Perform an independent review or
       audit of the security controls in each application at least every three
       years.  Consider identifying a deficiency pursuant to OMB Circular No.
       A-123, "Management Accountability and Control" and the Federal Managers'
       Financial Integrity Act if there is no assignment of responsibility for
       security, no security plan, or no authorization to process for the
       application.

       4) Authorize Processing.  Ensure that a management official authorizes
       in writing use of the application by confirming that its security plan
       as implemented adequately secures the application.  Results of the most
       recent review or audit of controls shall be a factor in management
       authorizations.  The application must be authorized prior to operating
       and re-authorized at least every three years thereafter.  Management
       authorization implies accepting the risk of each system used by the
       application. 

4. Assignment of Responsibilities

    a. Department of Commerce.  The Secretary of Commerce shall:

       1) Develop and issue appropriate standards and guidance for the security
       of sensitive information in Federal computer systems.

       2) Review and update guidelines for training in computer security
       awareness and accepted computer security practice, with assistance from
       OPM.

       3) Provide agencies guidance for security planning to assist in their
       development of application and system security plans.

       4) Provide guidance and assistance, as appropriate, to agencies
       concerning cost-effective controls when interconnecting with other
       systems.

       5) Coordinate agency incident response activities to promote sharing of
       incident response information and related vulnerabilities.

       6) Evaluate new information technologies to assess their security
       vulnerabilities, with technical assistance from the Department of
       Defense, and apprise Federal agencies of such vulnerabilities as soon as
       they are known.

    b. Department of Defense.  The Secretary of Defense shall:

       1) Provide appropriate technical advice and assistance (including work
       products) to the Department of Commerce.

       2) Assist the Department of Commerce in evaluating the vulnerabilities
       of emerging information technologies. 

    c. Department of Justice.  The Attorney General shall:

       1) Provide appropriate guidance to agencies on legal remedies regarding
       security incidents and ways to report and work with law enforcement
       concerning such incidents.

       2) Pursue appropriate legal actions when security incidents occur.

    d. General Services Administration.  The Administrator of General Services
    shall:

       1) Provide guidance to agencies on addressing security considerations
       when acquiring automated data processing equipment (as defined in
       section 111(a)(2) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services
       Act of 1949, as amended).

       2) Facilitate the development of contract vehicles for agencies to use
       in the acquisition of cost-effective security products and services
       (e.g., back-up services).

       3) Provide appropriate security services to meet the needs of Federal
       agencies to the extent that such services are cost-effective.

    e. Office of Personnel Management.  The Director of the Office of Personnel
    Management shall:

       1) Assure that its regulations concerning computer security training for
       Federal civilian employees are effective.

       2) Assist the Department of Commerce in updating and maintaining
       guidelines for training in computer security awareness and accepted
       computer security practice.

    f. Security Policy Board.  The Security Policy Board shall coordinate the
    activities of the Federal government regarding the security of information
    technology that processes classified information in accordance with
    applicable national security directives;

5. Correction of Deficiencies and Reports

    a. Correction of Deficiencies.  Agencies shall correct deficiencies which
    are identified through the reviews of security for systems and major
    applications described above.

    b. Reports on Deficiencies.  In accordance with OMB Circular No. A-123,
    "Management Accountability and Control", if a deficiency in controls is
    judged by the agency head to be material when weighed against other agency
    deficiencies, it shall be included in the annual FMFIA report.  Less
    significant deficiencies shall be reported and progress on corrective
    actions tracked at the appropriate agency level.

    c. Summaries of Security Plans.  Agencies shall include a summary of their
    system security plans and major application plans in the strategic plan
    required by the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3506).

B. Descriptive Information.

The following descriptive language is explanatory.  It is included to assist
in understanding the requirements of the Appendix.

The Appendix re-orients the Federal computer security program to better
respond to a rapidly changing technological environment.  It establishes
government-wide responsibilities for Federal computer security and requires
Federal agencies to adopt a minimum set of management controls.  These
management controls are directed at individual information technology users in
order to reflect the distributed nature of today's technology.  

For security to be most effective, the controls must be part of day-to-day
operations.  This is best accomplished by planning for security not as a
separate activity, but as an integral part of overall planning.

"Adequate security" is defined as "security commensurate with the risk and
magnitude of harm resulting from the loss, misuse, or unauthorized access to
or modification of information."  This definition explicitly emphasizes the
risk-based policy for cost-effective security established by the Computer
Security Act.

The Appendix no longer requires the preparation of formal risk analyses.  In
the past, substantial resources have been expended doing complex analyses of
specific risks to systems, with limited tangible benefit in terms of improved
security for the systems.  Rather than continue to try to precisely measure
risk, security efforts are better served by generally assessing risks and
taking actions to manage them.  While formal risk analyses need not be
performed, the need to determine adequate security will require that a risk-
based approach be used.  This risk assessment approach should include a
consideration of the major factors in risk management:  the value of the
system or application, threats, vulnerabilities, and the effectiveness of
current or proposed safeguards.   Additional guidance on effective risk
assessment is available in "An Introduction to Computer Security:  The NIST
Handbook" (March 16, 1995).

Discussion of the Appendix's Major Provisions.  The following discussion is
provided to aid reviewers in understanding the changes in emphasis in the
Appendix.

Automated Information Security Programs.  Agencies are required to establish
controls to assure adequate security for all information processed,
transmitted, or stored in Federal automated information systems.  This
Appendix emphasizes management controls affecting individual users of
information technology.  Technical and operational controls support management
controls. To be effective, all must interrelate.  For example, authentication
of individual users is an important management control, for which password
protection is a technical control.  However, password protection will only be
effective if both a strong technology is employed, and it is managed to assure
that it is used correctly.

Four controls are set forth:  assigning responsibility for security, security
planning, periodic review of security controls, and management authorization. 
The Appendix requires that these management controls be applied in two areas
of management responsibility:  one for general support systems and one for
major applications.

The terms "general support system" and "major application" were used in OMB
Bulletins Nos. 88-16 and 90-08.  A general support system is "an
interconnected set of information resources under the same direct management
control which shares common functionality."  Such a system can be, for
example, a local area network (LAN) including smart terminals that supports a
branch office, an agency-wide backbone, a communications network, a
departmental data processing center including its operating system and
utilities, a tactical radio network, or a shared information processing
service organization.  Normally, the purpose of a general support system is to
provide processing or communications support.

A major application is a use of information and information technology to
satisfy a specific set of user requirements that requires special management
attention to security due to the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from the
loss, misuse or unauthorized access to or modification of the information in
the application.  All applications require some level of security, and
adequate security for most of them should be provided by security of the
general support systems in which they operate.   However, certain
applications, because of the nature of the information in them, require
special management oversight and should be treated as major.  Agencies are
expected to exercise management judgement in determining which of their
applications are major.

The focus of OMB Bulletins Nos. 88-16 and 90-08 was on identifying and
securing both general support systems and applications which contained
sensitive information.  The Appendix requires the establishment of security
controls in all general support systems, under the presumption that all
contain some sensitive information, and focuses extra security controls on a
limited number of particularly high-risk or major applications.

a. General Support Systems.  The following controls are required in all
general support systems:

    1) Assign Responsibility for Security.  For each system, an individual
    should be a focal point for assuring there is adequate security within the
    system, including ways to prevent, detect, and recover from security
    problems.  That responsibility should be assigned in writing to an
    individual trained in the technology used in the system and in providing
    security for such technology, including the management of security controls
    such as user identification and authentication.

    2) Security Plan.  The Computer Security Act requires that security plans
    be developed for all Federal computer systems that contain sensitive
    information.  Given the expansion of distributed processing since passage
    of the Act, the presumption in the Appendix is that all general support
    systems contain some sensitive information which requires protection to
    assure its integrity, availability, or confidentiality, and therefore all
    systems require security plans.

    Previous guidance on security planning was contained in OMB Bulletin No.
    90-08.  This Appendix supersedes OMB Bulletin 90-08 and expands the
    coverage of security plans from Bulletin 90-08 to include rules of
    individual behavior as well as technical security.  Consistent with OMB
    Bulletin 90-08, the Appendix directs NIST to update and expand security
    planning guidance and issue it as a Federal Information Processing Standard
    (FIPS).  In the interim, agencies should continue to use the Appendix of
    OMB Bulletin No. 90-08 as guidance for the technical portion of their
    security plans. 

    The Appendix continues the requirement that independent advice and comment
    on the security plan for each system be sought.  The intent of this
    requirement is to improve the plans, foster communication between managers
    of different systems, and promote the sharing of security expertise.

    This Appendix also continues the requirement from the Computer Security Act
    that summaries of security plans be included in agency strategic
    information resources management plans.  OMB will provide additional
    guidance about the contents of those strategic plans, pursuant to the
    Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995.

    The following specific security controls should be included in the security
    plan for a general support system:

       a) Rules.  An important new requirement for security plans is the
       establishment of a set of rules of behavior for individual users of each
       general support system.  These rules should clearly delineate
       responsibilities of and expectations for all individuals with access to
       the system.  They should be consistent with system-specific policy as
       described in "An Introduction to Computer Security:  The NIST Handbook"
       (March 16, 1995).  In addition, they should state the consequences of
       non-compliance.  The rules should be in writing and will form the basis
       for security awareness and training.

       The development of rules for a system must take into consideration the
       needs of all parties who use the system.  Rules should be as stringent
       as necessary to provide adequate security.  Therefore, the acceptable
       level of risk for the system must be established and should form the
       basis for determining the rules.

       Rules should cover such matters as work at home, dial-in access,
       connection to the Internet, use of copyrighted works, unofficial use of
       government equipment, the assignment and limitation of system
       privileges, and individual accountability.  Often rules should reflect
       technical security controls in the system.  For example, rules regarding
       password use should be consistent with technical password features in
       the system.  Rules may be enforced through administrative sanctions
       specifically related to the system (e.g. loss of system privileges) or
       through more general sanctions as are imposed for violating other rules
       of conduct.  In addition, the rules should specifically address
       restoration of service as a concern of all users of the system.

       b) Training.  The Computer Security Act requires Federal agencies to
       provide for the mandatory periodic training in computer security
       awareness and accepted computer security practice of all employees who
       are involved with the management, use or operation of a Federal computer
       system within or under the supervision of the Federal agency.  This
       includes contractors as well as employees of the agency.  Access
       provided to members of the public should be constrained by controls in
       the applications through which access is allowed, and training should be
       within the context of those controls.  The Appendix enforces such
       mandatory training by requiring its completion prior to granting access
       to the system.  Each new user of a general support system in some sense
       introduces a risk to all other users. Therefore, each user should be
       versed in acceptable behavior -- the rules of the system -- before being
       allowed to use the system.  Training should also inform the individual
       how to get help in the event of difficulty with using or security of the
       system.

       Training should be tailored to what a user needs to know to use the
       system securely, given the nature of that use.  Training may be
       presented in stages, for example as more access is granted.  In some
       cases, the training should be in the form of classroom instruction.  In
       other cases, interactive computer sessions or well-written and
       understandable brochures may be sufficient, depending on the risk and
       magnitude of harm.

       Over time, attention to security tends to dissipate.  In addition,
       changes to a system may necessitate a change in the rules or user
       procedures.  Therefore, individuals should periodically have refresher
       training to assure that they continue to understand and abide by the
       applicable rules.

       To assist agencies, the Appendix requires NIST, with assistance from the
       Office of Personnel Management (OPM), to update its existing guidance. 
       It also proposes that OPM assure that its rules for computer security
       training for Federal civilian employees are effective.

       c) Personnel Controls.  It has long been recognized that the greatest
       harm has come from authorized individuals engaged in improper
       activities, whether intentional or accidental.  In every general support
       system, a number of technical, operational, and management controls are
       used to prevent and detect harm.  Such controls include individual
       accountability, "least privilege," and separation of duties.

       Individual accountability consists of holding someone responsible for
       his or her actions.  In a general support system, accountability is
       normally accomplished by identifying and authenticating users of the
       system and subsequently tracing actions on the system to the user who
       initiated them.  This may be done, for example, by looking for patterns
       of behavior by users.

       Least privilege is the practice of restricting a user's access (to data
       files, to processing capability, or to peripherals) or type of access
       (read, write, execute, delete) to the minimum necessary to perform his
       or her job.

       Separation of duties is the practice of dividing the steps in a critical
       function among different individuals.  For example, one system
       programmer can create a critical piece of operating system code, while
       another authorizes its implementation.  Such a control keeps a single
       individual from subverting a critical process.  

       Nevertheless, in some instances, individuals may be given the ability to
       bypass some significant technical and operational controls in order to
       perform system administration and maintenance functions (e.g., LAN
       administrators or systems programmers).  Screening such individuals in
       positions of trust will supplement technical, operational, and
       management controls, particularly where the risk and magnitude of harm
       is high.

       d) Incident Response Capability.  Security incidents, whether caused by
       viruses, hackers, or software bugs, are becoming more common.  When
       faced with a security incident, an agency should be able to respond in a
       manner that both protects its own information and helps to protect the
       information of others who might be affected by the incident.  To address
       this concern, agencies should establish formal incident response
       mechanisms.  Awareness and training for individuals with access to the
       system should include how to use the system's incident response
       capability.

       To be fully effective, incident handling must also include sharing
       information concerning common vulnerabilities and threats with those in
       other systems and other agencies.  The Appendix directs agencies to
       effectuate such sharing, and tasks NIST to coordinate those agency
       activities government-wide.

       The Appendix also directs the Department of Justice to provide
       appropriate guidance on pursuing legal remedies in the case of serious
       incidents.

       e) Continuity of Support.  Inevitably, there will be service
       interruptions.  Agency plans should assure that there is an ability to
       recover and provide service sufficient to meet the minimal needs of
       users of the system.  Manual procedures are generally NOT a viable back-
       up option.  When automated support is not available, many functions of
       the organization will effectively cease.  Therefore, it is important to
       take cost-effective steps to manage any disruption of service.  

       Decisions on the level of service needed at any particular time and on
       priorities in service restoration should be made in consultation with
       the users of the system and incorporated in the system rules. 
       Experience has shown that recovery plans that are periodically tested
       are substantially more viable than those that are not.  Moreover,
       untested plans may actually create a false sense of security.

       f) Technical Security.  Agencies should assure that each system
       appropriately uses effective security products and techniques,
       consistent with standards and guidance from NIST.  Often such techniques
       will correspond with system rules of behavior, such as in the proper use
       of password protection.

       The Appendix directs NIST to continue to issue computer security
       guidance to assist agencies in planning for and using technical security
       products and techniques.  Until such guidance is issued, however, the
       planning guidance included in OMB Bulletin 90-08 can assist in
       determining techniques for effective security in a system and in
       addressing technical controls in the security plan.

       g) System Interconnection.   In order for a community to effectively
       manage risk, it must control access to and from other systems.  The
       degree of such control should be established in the rules of the system
       and all participants should be made aware of any limitations on outside
       access.  Technical controls to accomplish this should be put in place in
       accordance with guidance issued by NIST.

       There are varying degrees of how connected a system is.  For example,
       some systems will choose to isolate themselves, others will restrict
       access such as allowing only e-mail connections or remote access only
       with sophisticated authentication, and others will be fully open.  The
       management decision to interconnect should be based on the availability
       and use of technical and non-technical safeguards and consistent with
       the acceptable level of risk defined in the system rules.

    3) Review of Security Controls.  The security of a system will degrade over
    time, as the technology evolves and as people and procedures change. 
    Reviews should assure that management, operational, personnel, and
    technical controls are functioning effectively.  Security controls may be
    reviewed by an independent audit or a self review.  The type and rigor of
    review or audit should be commensurate with the acceptable level of risk
    that is established in the rules for the system and the likelihood of
    learning useful information to improve security.  Technical tools such as
    virus scanners, vulnerability assessment products (which look for known
    security problems, configuration errors, and the installation of the latest
    patches), and penetration testing can assist in the on-going review of
    different facets of systems.  However, these tools are no substitute for a
    formal management review at least every three years.  Indeed, for some
    high-risk systems with rapidly changing technology, three years will be too
    long.

    Depending upon the risk and magnitude of harm that could result, weaknesses
    identified during the review of security controls should be reported as
    deficiencies in accordance with OMB Circular No. A-123, "Management
    Accountability and Control" and the Federal Managers' Financial Integrity
    Act.  In particular, if a basic management control such as assignment of
    responsibility, a workable security plan, or management authorization are
    missing, then consideration should be given to identifying a deficiency. 

    4) Authorize Processing.  The authorization of a system to process
    information, granted by a management official, provides an important
    quality control (some agencies refer to this authorization as
    accreditation).  By authorizing processing in a system, a manager accepts
    the risk associated with it.  Authorization is not a decision that should
    be made by the security staff.  

    Both the security official and the authorizing management official have
    security responsibilities.  In general, the security official is closer to
    the day-to-day operation of the system and will direct or perform security
    tasks.  The authorizing official will normally have general responsibility
    for the organization supported by the system.

    Management authorization should be based on an assessment of management,
    operational, and technical controls.  Since the security plan establishes
    the security controls, it should form the basis for the authorization,
    supplemented by more specific studies as needed.  In addition, the periodic
    review of controls should also contribute to future authorizations.  Some
    agencies perform "certification reviews" of their systems periodically. 
    These formal technical evaluations lead to a management accreditation, or
    "authorization to process."  Such certifications (such as those using the
    methodology in FIPS Pub 102 "Guideline for Computer Security Certification
    and Accreditation") can provide useful information to assist management in
    authorizing a system, particularly when combined with a review of the broad
    behavioral controls envisioned in the security plan required by the
    Appendix.

    Re-authorization should occur prior to a significant change in processing,
    but at least every three years.  It should be done more often where there
    is a high risk and potential magnitude of harm.
  
b. Controls in Major Applications.  Certain applications require special
management attention due to the risk and magnitude of harm that could occur. 
For such applications, the controls of the support system(s) in which they
operate are likely to be insufficient.  Therefore, additional controls
specific to the application are required.  Since the function of applications
is the direct manipulation and use of information, controls for securing
applications should emphasize protection of information and the way it is
manipulated.

    1) Assign Responsibility for Security.  By definition, major applications
    are high risk and require special management attention.  Major applications
    usually support a single agency function and often are supported by more
    than one general support system.  It is important, therefore, that an
    individual be assigned responsibility in writing to assure that the
    particular application has adequate security.  To be effective, this
    individual should be knowledgeable in the information and process supported
    by the application and in the management, personnel, operational, and
    technical controls used to protect the application.

    2) Application Security Plans.  Security for each major application should
    be addressed by a security plan specific to the application.  The plan
    should include controls specific to protecting information and should be
    developed from the application manager's perspective.  To assist in
    assuring its viability, the plan should be provided to the manager of the
    primary support system which the application uses for advice and comment. 
    This recognizes the critical dependence of the security of major
    applications on the underlying support systems they use.  Summaries of
    application security plans should be included in strategic information
    resource management plans in accordance with this Circular.

       a) Application Rules.  Rules of behavior should be established which
       delineate the responsibilities and expected behavior of all individuals
       with access to the application.  The rules should state the consequences
       of inconsistent behavior.  Often the rules will be associated with
       technical controls implemented in the application.  Such rules should
       include, for example, limitations on changing data, searching databases,
       or divulging information.  

       b) Specialized Training.  Training is required for all individuals given
       access to the application, including members of the public.  It should
       vary depending on the type of access allowed and the risk that access
       represents to the security of the application and information in it. 
       This training will be in addition to that required for access to a
       support system.

       c) Personnel Security.  For most major applications, management controls
       such as individual accountability requirements, separation of duties
       enforced by access controls, or limitations on the processing privileges
       of individuals, are generally more cost-effective personnel security
       controls than background screening.  Such controls should be implemented
       as both technical controls and as application rules.  For example,
       technical controls to ensure individual accountability, such as looking
       for patterns of user behavior, are most effective if users are aware
       that there is such a technical control.  If adequate audit or access
       controls (through both technical and non-technical methods) cannot be
       established, then it may be cost-effective to screen personnel,
       commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm they could cause.  The
       change in emphasis on screening in the Appendix should not affect
       background screening deemed necessary because of other duties that an
       individual may perform.

       d) Contingency Planning.  Normally the Federal mission supported by a
       major application is critically dependent on the application.  Manual
       processing is generally NOT a viable back-up option.  Managers should
       plan for how they will perform their mission and/or recover from the
       loss of existing application support, whether the loss is due to the
       inability of the application to function or a general support system
       failure.  Experience has demonstrated that testing a contingency plan
       significantly improves its viability.  Indeed, untested plans or plans
       not tested for a long period of time may create a false sense of ability
       to recover in a timely manner.

       e) Technical Controls.  Technical security controls, for example tests
       to filter invalid entries, should be built into each application.  Often
       these controls will correspond with the rules of behavior for the
       application.  Under the previous Appendix, application security was
       focused on the process by which sensitive, custom applications were
       developed.  While that process is not addressed in detail in this
       Appendix, it remains an effective method for assuring that security
       controls are built into applications.  Additionally, the technical
       security controls defined in OMB Bulletin No. 90-08 will continue, until
       that guidance is replaced by NIST's security planning guidance.

       f) Information Sharing.  Assure that information which is shared with
       Federal organizations, State and local governments, and the private
       sector is appropriately protected comparable to the protection provided
       when the information is within the application.  Controls on the
       information may stay the same or vary when the information is shared
       with another entity.  For example, the primary user of the information
       may require a high level of availability while the secondary user does
       not, and can therefore relax some of the controls designed to maintain
       the availability of the information.  At the same time, however, the
       information shared may require a level of confidentiality that should be
       extended to the secondary user.  This normally requires notification and
       agreement to protect the information prior to its being shared.

       g) Public Access Controls.  Permitting public access to a Federal
       application is an important method of improving information exchange
       with the public.  At the same time, it introduces risks to the Federal
       application.  To mitigate these risks, additional controls should be in
       place as appropriate.  These controls are in addition to controls such
       as "firewalls" that are put in place for security of the general support
       system.
 
       In general, it is more difficult to apply conventional controls to
       public access systems, because many of the users of the system may not
       be subject to individual accountability policies.  In addition, public
       access systems may be a target for mischief because of their higher
       visibility and published access methods.

       Official records need to be protected against loss or alteration. 
       Official records in electronic form are particularly susceptible since
       they can be relatively easy to change or destroy.  Therefore, official
       records should be segregated from information made directly accessible
       to the public.  There are different ways to segregate records.  Some
       agencies and organizations are creating dedicated information
       dissemination systems (such as bulletin boards or World Wide Web
       servers) to support this function.  These systems can be on the outside
       of secure gateways which protect internal agency records from outside
       access.  

       In order to secure applications that allow direct public access,
       conventional techniques such as least privilege (limiting the processing
       capability as well as access to data) and integrity assurances (such as
       checking for viruses, clearly labeling the age of data, or periodically
       spot checking data) should also be used.  Additional guidance on
       securing public access systems is available from NIST Computer Systems
       Laboratory Bulletin "Security Issues in Public Access Systems" (May,
       1993).

    3) Review of Application Controls.  At least every three years, an
    independent review or audit of the security controls for each major
    application should be performed.  Because of the higher risk involved in
    major applications, the review or audit should be independent of the
    manager responsible for the application.  Such reviews should verify that
    responsibility for the security of the application has been assigned, that
    a viable security plan for the application is in place, and that a manager
    has authorized the processing of the application.  A deficiency in any of
    these controls should be considered a deficiency pursuant to the Federal
    Manager's Financial Integrity Act and OMB Circular No. A-123, "Management
    Accountability and Control."

    The review envisioned here is different from the system test and
    certification process required in the current Appendix.  That process,
    however, remains useful for assuring that technical security features are
    built into custom-developed software applications.  While the controls in
    that process are not specifically called for in this Appendix, they remain
    in Bulletin No. 90-08, and are recommended in appropriate circumstances as
    technical controls.

    4) Authorize Processing.  A major application should be authorized by the
    management official responsible for the function supported by the
    application at least every three years, but more often where the risk and
    magnitude of harm is high.  The intent of this requirement is to assure
    that the senior official whose mission will be adversely affected by
    security weaknesses in the application periodically assesses and accepts
    the risk of operating the application.  The authorization should be based
    on the application security plan and any review(s) performed on the
    application.  It should also take into account the risks from the general
    support systems used by the application.

4. Assignment of Responsibilities.  The Appendix assigns government-wide
responsibilities to agencies that are consistent with their missions and the
Computer Security Act.

    a. Department of Commerce.  The Department of Commerce, through NIST, is
    assigned the following responsibilities consistent with the Computer
    Security Act.

       1) Develop and issue security standards and guidance.

       2) Review and update, with assistance from OPM, the guidelines for
       security training issued in 1988 pursuant to the Computer Security Act
       to assure they are effective.

       3) Replace and update the technical planning guidance in the appendix to
       OMB Bulletin 90-08  This should include guidance on effective risk-based
       security absent a formal risk analysis.

       4) Provide agencies with guidance and assistance concerning effective
       controls for systems when interconnecting with other systems, including
       the Internet.  Such guidance on, for example, so-called "firewalls" is
       becoming widely available and is critical to agencies as they consider
       how to interconnect their communications capabilities.

       5) Coordinate agency incident response activities. Coordination of
       agency incident response activities should address both threats and
       vulnerabilities as well as improve the ability of the Federal government
       for rapid and effective cooperation in response to serious security
       breaches. 

       6) Assess security vulnerabilities in new information technologies and
       apprise Federal agencies of such vulnerabilities.  The intent of this
       new requirement is to help agencies understand the security implications
       of technology before they purchase and field it.  In the past, there
       have been too many instances where agencies have acquired and
       implemented technology, then found out about vulnerabilities in the
       technology and had to retrofit security measures.  This activity is
       intended to help avoid such difficulties in the future.

    b. Department of Defense.  The Department, through the National Security
    Agency, should provide technical advice and assistance to NIST, including
    work products such as technical security guidelines, which NIST can draw
    upon for developing standards and guidelines for protecting sensitive
    information in Federal computers.

    Also, the Department, through the National Security Agency, should assist
    NIST in evaluating vulnerabilities in emerging technologies.  Such
    vulnerabilities may present a risk to national security information as well
    as to unclassified information.

    c. Department of Justice.  The Department of Justice should provide
    appropriate guidance to Federal agencies on legal remedies available to
    them when serious security incidents occur.  Such guidance should include
    ways to report incidents and cooperate with law enforcement.

    In addition, the Department should pursue appropriate legal actions on
    behalf of the Federal government when serious security incidents occur.

    d. General Services Administration.  The General Services Administration
    should provide agencies guidance for addressing security considerations
    when acquiring information technology products or services.  This continues
    the current requirement.

    In addition, where cost-effective to do so, GSA should establish
    government-wide contract vehicles for agencies to use to acquire certain
    security services.  Such vehicles already exist for providing system back-
    up support and conducting security analyses.

    GSA should also provide appropriate security services to assist Federal
    agencies to the extent that provision of such services is cost-effective. 
    This includes providing, in conjunction with the Department of Defense and
    the Department of Commerce, appropriate services which support Federal use
    of the National Information Infrastructure (e.g., use of digital signature
    technology).

    e. Office of Personnel Management.  In accordance with the Computer
    Security Act, OPM should review its regulations concerning computer
    security training and assure that they are effective.

    In addition, OPM should assist the Department of Commerce in the review and
    update of its computer security awareness and training guidelines.  OPM
    worked closely with NIST in developing the current guidelines and should
    work with NIST in revising those guidelines.

    f. Security Policy Board.  The Security Policy Board is assigned
    responsibility for national security policy coordination in accordance with
    the appropriate Presidential directive.  This includes policy for the
    security of information technology used to process classified information.

    Circular A-130 and this Appendix do not apply to information technology
    that supports certain critical national security missions, as defined in 44
    U.S.C. 3502(9) and 10 U.S.C. 2315.  Policy and procedural requirements for
    the security of national security systems (telecommunications and
    information systems that contain classified information or that support
    those critical national security missions (44 U.S.C. 3502(9) and 10 U.S.C.
    2315)) is assigned to the Department of Defense pursuant to Presidential
    directive.  The Circular clarifies that information classified for national
    security purposes should also be handled in accordance with appropriate
    national security directives.  Where classified information is required to
    be protected by more stringent security requirements, those requirements
    should be followed rather than the requirements of this Appendix.

5. Reports.  The Appendix requires agencies to provide two reports to OMB:

The first is a requirement that agencies report security deficiencies and
material weaknesses within their FMFIA reporting mechanisms as defined by OMB
Circular No. A-123, "Management Accountability and Control," and take
corrective actions in accordance with that directive.

The second, defined by the Computer Security Act, requires that a summary of
agency security plans be included in the information resources management plan
required by the Paperwork Reduction Act.
Appendix IV to OMB Circular No. A-130 - Analysis of Key Sections

1.  Purpose

The purpose of this Appendix is to provide a general context and explanation
for the contents of the key Sections of the Circular.

2.  Background

The Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) of 1980, Public Law 96-511, as amended by
the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, Public Law 104-13, codified at Chapter 35
of Title 44 of the United States Code, establishes a broad mandate for
agencies to perform their information activities in an efficient, effective,
and economical manner.  Section 3504 of the Act provides authority to the
Director, OMB, to develop and implement uniform and consistent information
resources management policies; oversee the development and promote the use of
information management principles, standards, and guidelines; evaluate agency
information management practices in order to determine their adequacy and
efficiency, and determine compliance of such practices with the policies,
principles, standards, and guidelines promulgated by the Director.

The Circular implements OMB authority under the PRA with respect to Section
3504(b), general information resources management policy, Section 3504(d),
information dissemination, Section 3504(f), records management, Section
3504(g), privacy and security, and Section 3504(h), information technology. 
The Circular also implements certain provisions of the Privacy Act of 1974 (5
U.S.C. 552a); the Chief Financial Officers Act (31 U.S.C. 3512 et seq.);
Sections 111 and 206 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act
of 1949, as amended (40 U.S.C. 759 and 487, respectively); the Computer
Security Act (40 U.S.C. 759 note); the Budget and Accounting Act of 1921 (31
U.S.C. 1 et seq.); and Executive Order No. 12046 of March 27, 1978, and
Executive Order No. 12472 of April 3, 1984, Assignment of National Security
and Emergency Telecommunications Functions.  The Circular complements 5 CFR
Part 1320, Controlling Paperwork Burden on the Public, which implements other
Sections of the PRA dealing with controlling the reporting and recordkeeping
burden placed on the public.

In addition, the Circular revises and consolidates policy and procedures in
seven previous OMB directives and rescinds those directives, as follows:

A-3   - Government Publications

A-71  - Responsibilities for the Administration and Management of Automatic
Data Processing Activities Transmittal Memorandum No. 1 to Circular No. A-71 -
Security of Federal Automated Information Systems 

A-90  - Cooperating with State and Local Governments to Coordinate and Improve
Information Systems

A-108 - Responsibilities for the Maintenance of Records about Individuals by
Federal Agencies

A-114 - Management of Federal Audiovisual Activities

A-121 - Cost Accounting, Cost Recovery, and Interagency Sharing of Data
Processing Facilities 

3. Analysis

Section 6, Definitions.  Access and Dissemination.  The original Circular No.
A-130 distinguished between the terms "access to information" and
"dissemination of information" in order to separate statutory requirements
from policy considerations.  The first term means giving members of the
public, at their request, information to which they are entitled by a law such
as the FOIA.  The latter means actively distributing information to the public
at the initiative of the agency.  The distinction appeared useful at the time
Circular No. A-130 was written, because it allowed OMB to focus discussion on
Federal agencies' responsibilities for actively distributing information. 
However, popular usage and evolving technology have blurred differences
between the terms "access" and "dissemination" and readers of the Circular
were confused by the distinction.  For example, if an agency "disseminates"
information via an on-line computer system, one speaks of permitting users to
"access" the information, and on-line "access" becomes a form of
"dissemination."

Thus, the revision defines only the term "dissemination."  Special
considerations based on access statutes such as the Privacy Act and the FOIA
are explained in context.

Government Information.  The definition of "government information" includes
information created, collected, processed, disseminated, or disposed of both
by and for the Federal Government.  This recognizes the increasingly
distributed nature of information in electronic environments.  Many agencies,
in addition to collecting information for government use and for dissemination
to the public, require members of the public to maintain information or to
disclose it to the public.  Sound information resources management dictates
that agencies consider the costs and benefits of a full range of alternatives
to meet government objectives.  In some cases, there is no need for the
government actually to collect the information itself, only to assure that it
is made publicly available.  For example, banks insured by the FDIC must
provide statements of financial condition to bank customers on request. 
Particularly when information is available in electronic form, networks make
the physical location of information increasingly irrelevant.

The inclusion of information created, collected, processed, disseminated, or
disposed of for the Federal Government in the definition of "government
information" does not imply that responsibility for implementing the
provisions of the Circular itself extends beyond the executive agencies to
other entities.  Such an interpretation would be inconsistent with Section 4,
Applicability, and with existing law.  For example, the courts have held that
requests to Federal agencies for release of information under the FOIA do not
always extend to those performing information activities under grant or
contract to a Federal agency.  Similarly, grantees may copyright information
where the government may not.  Thus the information responsibilities of
grantees and contractors are not identical to those of Federal agencies except
to the extent that the agencies make them so in the underlying grants or
contracts.  Similarly, agency information resources management
responsibilities do not extend to other entities. 

Information Dissemination Product.  This notice defines the term "information
dissemination product" to include all information that is disseminated by
Federal agencies.  While the provision of access to on-line databases and
search software included on compact disk, read-only memory (CD-ROM) are often
called information services rather than products, there is no clear
distinction and, moreover, no real difference for policy purposes between the
two.  Thus, the term "information dissemination product" applies to both
products and services, and makes no distinction based on how the information
is delivered.

Section 8a(1).  Information Management Planning.  Parallel to new Section 7,
Basic Considerations and Assumptions, Section 8a begins with information
resources management planning.  Planning is the process of establishing a
course of action to achieve desired results with available resources. 
Planners translate organizational missions into specific goals and, in turn,
into measurable objectives.

The PRA introduced the concept of information resources management and the
principle of information as an institutional resource which has both value and
associated costs.  Information resources management is a tool that managers
use to achieve agency objectives.  Information resources management is
successful if it enables managers to achieve agency objectives efficiently and
effectively.

Information resources management planning is an integral part of overall
mission planning.  Agencies need to plan from the outset for the steps in the
information life cycle.  When creating or collecting information, agencies
must plan how they will process and transmit the information, how they will
use it, how they will protect its integrity, what provisions they will make
for access to it, whether and how they will disseminate it, how they will
store and retrieve it, and finally, how the information will ultimately be
disposed of.  They must also plan for the effects their actions and programs
will have on the public and State and local governments.

The Role of State and Local Governments.  OMB made additions at Sections 7a,
7e, and 7j, Basic Considerations and Assumptions, concerning State and local
governments, and also in policy statements at Sections 8a(1)(c), (3)(f),
(5)(d)(iii), and (8)(e).

State and local governments, and tribal governments, cooperate as major
partners with the Federal Government in the collection, processing, and
dissemination of information.  For example, State governments are the
principal collectors and/or producers of information in the areas of health,
welfare, education, labor markets, transportation, the environment, and
criminal justice.  The States supply the Federal Government with data on aid
to families with dependent children; medicare; school enrollments, staffing,
and financing; statistics on births, deaths, and infectious diseases;
population related data that form the basis for national estimates; employment
and labor market data; and data used for census geography.  National
information resources are greatly enhanced through these major cooperating
efforts.

Federal agencies need to be sensitive to the role of State and local
governments, and tribal governments, in managing information and in managing
information technology.  When planning, designing, and carrying out
information collections, agencies should systematically consider what effect
their activities will have on cities, counties, and States, and take steps to
involve these governments as appropriate.  Agencies should ensure that their
information collections impose the minimum burden and do not duplicate or
conflict with local efforts or other Federal agency requirements or mandates. 
The goal is that Federal agencies routinely integrate State and local
government concerns into Federal information resources management practices. 
This goal is consistent with standards for State and local government review
of Federal policies and programs.

Training.  Training is particularly important in view of the changing nature
of information resources management.  Decentralization of information
technology has placed the management of automated information and information
technology directly in the hands of nearly all agency personnel rather than in
the hands of a few employees at centralized facilities.  Agencies must plan
for incorporating policies and procedures regarding computer security, records
management, protection of privacy, and other safeguards into the training of
every employee and contractor.

Section 8a(2).  Information Collection.  The PRA requires that the creation or
collection of information be carried out in an efficient, effective, and
economical manner.  When Federal agencies create or collect information --
just as when they perform any other program functions -- they consume scarce
resources.  Such activities must be continually evaluated for their relevance
to agency missions.

Agencies must justify the creation or collection of information based on their
statutory functions.  Policy statement 8a(2) uses the justification standard
-- "necessary for the proper performance of the functions of the agency" --
established by the PRA (44 U.S.C. 3508).  Furthermore, the policy statement
includes the requirement that the information have practical utility, as
defined in the PRA (44 U.S.C. 3502(11)) and elaborated in 5 CFR Part 1320. 
Practical utility includes such qualities of information as accuracy,
adequacy, and reliability.  In the case of general purpose statistics or
recordkeeping, practical utility means that actual uses can be demonstrated (5
CFR 1320.3(l)).  It should be noted that OMB's intent in placing emphasis on
reducing unjustified burden in collecting information, an emphasis consistent
with the Act, is not to diminish the importance of collecting information
whenever agencies have legitimate program reasons for doing so.  Rather, the
concern is that the burdens imposed should not exceed the benefits to be
derived from the information.  Moreover, if the same benefit can be obtained
by alternative means that impose a lesser burden, that alternative should be
adopted.

Section 8a(3).  Electronic Information Collection.  Section 7l articulates a
basic assumption of the Circular that modern information technology can help
the government provide better service to the public through improved
management of government programs.  One potentially useful application of
information technology is in the government's collection of information. While
some information collections may not be good candidates for electronic
techniques, many are.  Agencies with major electronic information collection
programs have found that automated information collections allow them to meet
program objectives more efficiently and effectively.  Electronic data
interchange (EDI) and related standards for the electronic exchange of
information will ease transmission and processing of routine business
transaction information such as invoices, purchase orders, price information,
bills of lading, health insurance claims, and other common commercial
documents.  EDI holds similar promise for the routine filing of regulatory
information such as tariffs, customs declarations, license applications, tax
information, and environmental reports.

Benefits to the public and agencies from electronic information collection
appear substantial.  Electronic methods of collection reduce paperwork burden,
reduce errors, facilitate validation, and provide increased convenience and
more timely receipt of benefits. 

The policy in Section 8a(3) encourages agencies to explore the use of
automated techniques for collection of information, and sets forth conditions
conducive to the use of those techniques.

Section 8a(4).  Records Management.  Section 8a(4) begins with the fundamental
requirement for Federal records management, namely, that agencies create and
keep adequate and proper documentation of their activities.  Federal agencies
cannot carry out their missions in a responsible and responsive manner without
adequate recordkeeping.  Section 7h articulates the basic considerations
concerning records management.  Policy statements concerning records
management are also interwoven throughout Section 8a, particularly in
subsections on planning (8a(1)(j)), information dissemination (8a(6)), and
safeguards (8a(9)).

Records support the immediate needs of government -- administrative, legal,
fiscal -- and ensure its continuity. Records are essential for protecting the
rights and interests of the public, and for monitoring the work of public
servants.  The government needs records to ensure accountability to the public
which includes making the information available to the public.

Each stage of the information life cycle carries with it records management
responsibilities.  Agencies need to record their plans, carefully document the
content and procedures of information collection, ensure proper documentation
as a feature of every information system, keep records of dissemination
programs, and, finally, ensure that records of permanent value are preserved.

Preserving records for future generations is the archival mission.  Advances
in technology affect the amount of information that can be created and saved,
and the ways this information can be made available.  Technological advances
can ease the task of records management; however, the rapid pace of change in
modern technology makes decisions about the appropriate application of
technology critical to records management.  Increasingly the records manager
must be concerned with preserving valuable electronic records in the context
of a constantly changing technological environment.

Records schedules are essential for the appropriate maintenance and
disposition of records.  Records schedules must be prepared in a timely
fashion, implement the General Records Schedules issued by the National
Archives and Records Administration, be approved by the Archivist of the
United States, and be kept accurate and current.  (See 44 U.S.C. 3301 et seq.) 
The National Archives and Records Administration and the General Services
Administration provide guidance and assistance to agencies in implementing
records management responsibilities. They also evaluate agencies' records
management programs to determine the extent to which they are appropriately
implementing their records management responsibilities.

Sections 8a(5) and 8a(6).  Information Dissemination Policy. Section 8a(5). 
Every agency has a responsibility to inform the public within the context of
its mission.  This responsibility requires that agencies distribute
information at the agency's initiative, rather than merely responding when the
public requests information.

The FOIA requires each agency to publish in the Federal Register current
descriptions of agency organization, where and how the public may obtain
information, the general methods and procedural requirements by which agency
functions are determined, rules of procedure, descriptions of forms and how to
obtain them, substantive regulations, statements of general policy, and
revisions to all the foregoing (5 U.S.C. 552(a)(1)).  The Privacy Act also
requires publication of information concerning "systems of records" which are
records retrieved by individual identifier such as name, Social Security
Number, or fingerprint.  The Government in the Sunshine Act requires agencies
to publish meeting announcements (5 U.S.C. 552b (e)(1)).  The PRA (44 U.S.C.
3507(a)(2)) and its implementing regulations (5 CFR Part 1320) require
agencies to publish notices when they submit information collection requests
for OMB approval.  The public's right of access to government information
under these statutes is balanced against other concerns, such as an
individual's right to privacy and protection of the government's deliberative
process.

As agencies satisfy these requirements, they provide the public basic
information about government activities.  Other statutes direct specific
agencies to issue specific information dissemination products or to conduct
information dissemination programs.  Beyond generic and specific statutory
requirements, agencies have responsibilities to disseminate information as a
necessary part of performing their functions.  For some agencies the
responsibility is made explicit and sweeping; for example, the Agriculture
Department is directed to "...diffuse among people of the United States,
useful information on subjects connected with agriculture...."  (7 U.S.C.
2201)  For other agencies, the responsibility may be much more narrowly drawn.

Information dissemination is also a consequence of other agency activities. 
Agency programs normally include an organized effort to inform the public
about the program.  Most agencies carry out programs that create or collect
information with the explicit or implicit intent that the information will be
made public.  Disseminating information is in many cases the logical extension
of information creation or collection.

In other cases, agencies may have information that is not meant for public
dissemination but which may be the subject of requests from the public.  When
the agency establishes that there is public demand for the information and
that it is in the public interest to disseminate the information, the agency
may decide to disseminate it automatically.

The policy in Section 8a(5)(d) sets forth several factors for agencies to take
into account in conducting their information dissemination programs.  First,
agencies must balance two goals:  maximizing the usefulness of the information
to the government and the public, and minimizing the cost to both.  Deriving
from the basic purposes of the PRA (44 U.S.C. 3501), the two goals are
frequently in tension because increasing usefulness usually costs more. 
Second, Section 8a(5)(d)(ii) requires agencies to conduct information
dissemination programs equitably and in a timely manner.  The word "equal" was
removed from this Section since there may be instances where, for example, an
agency determines that its mission includes disseminating information to
certain specific groups or members of the public, and the agency determines
that user charges will constitute a significant barrier to carrying out this
responsibility.  

Section 8a(5)(d)(iii), requiring agencies to take advantage of all
dissemination channels, recognizes that information reaches the public in many
ways.  Few persons may read a Federal Register notice describing an agency
action, but those few may be major secondary disseminators of the information. 
They may be affiliated with publishers of newspapers, newsletters,
periodicals, or books; affiliated with on-line database providers; or
specialists in certain information fields.  While millions of information
users in the public may be affected by the agency's action, only a handful may
have direct contact with the agency's own information dissemination products. 
As a deliberate strategy, therefore, agencies should cooperate with the
information's original creators, as well as with secondary disseminators, in
order to further information dissemination goals and foster a diversity of
information sources.  An adjunct responsibility to this strategy is reflected
in Section 8a(5)(d)(iv), which directs agencies to assist the public in
finding government information.  Agencies may accomplish this, for example, by
specifying and disseminating "locator" information, including information
about content, format, uses and limitations, location, and means of access.

Section 8a(6).  Information Dissemination Management System.  This Section
requires agencies to maintain an information dissemination management system
which can ensure the routine performance of certain functions, including the
essential functions previously required by Circular No. A-3.  Smaller agencies
need not establish elaborate formal systems, so long as the heads of the
agencies can ensure that the functions are being performed.

Subsection (6)(a) carries over a requirement from OMB Circular No. A-3 that
agencies' information dissemination products are to be, in the words of 44
U.S.C. 1108, "necessary in the transaction of the public business required by
law of the agency."  (Circular No. A-130 uses the expression "necessary for
the proper performance of agency functions," which OMB considers to be
equivalent to the expression in 44 U.S.C. 1108.)  The point is that agencies
should determine systematically the need for each information dissemination
product.

Section 8a(6)(b) recognizes that to carry out effective information
dissemination programs, agencies need knowledge of the marketplace in which
their information dissemination products are placed.  They need to know what
other information dissemination products users have available in order to
design the best agency product.  As agencies are constrained by finite
budgets, when there are several alternatives from which to choose, they should
not expend public resources filling needs which have already been met by
others in the public or private sector.  Agencies have a responsibility not to
undermine the existing diversity of information sources.

At the same time, an agency's responsibility to inform the public may be
independent of the availability or potential availability of a similar
information dissemination product.  That is, even when another governmental or
private entity has offered an information dissemination product identical or
similar to what the agency would produce, the agency may conclude that it
nonetheless has a responsibility to disseminate its own product.  Agencies
should minimize such instances of duplication but could reach such a
conclusion because legal considerations require an official government
information dissemination product.

Section 8a(6)(c) makes the Circular consistent with current practice (See OMB
Bulletins 88-15, 89-15, 90-09, and 91-16), by requiring agencies to establish
and maintain inventories of information dissemination products.  (These
bulletins eliminated annual reporting to OMB of title-by-title listings of
publications and the requirement for agencies to obtain OMB approval for each
new periodical.  Publications are now reviewed as necessary during the normal
budget review process.)  Inventories help other agencies and the public
identify information which is available.  This serves both to increase the
efficiency of the dissemination function and to avoid unnecessary burdens of
duplicative information collections.  A corollary, enunciated in Section
8a(6)(d), is that agencies can better serve public information needs by
developing finding aids for locating information produced by the agencies. 
Finally, Section 8a(6)(f) recognizes that there will be situations where
agencies may have to take appropriate steps to ensure that members of the
public with disabilities whom the agency has a responsibility to inform have a
reasonable ability to access the information dissemination products.

Depository Library Program.  Sections 8a(6)(g) and (h) pertain to the Federal
Depository Library Program.  Agencies are to establish procedures to ensure
compliance with 44 U.S.C. 1902, which requires that government publications
(defined in 44 U.S.C. 1901 and repeated in Section 6 of the Circular) be made
available to depository libraries through the Government Printing Office
(GPO).

Depository libraries are major partners with the Federal Government in the
dissemination of information and contribute significantly to the diversity of
information sources available to the public.  They provide a mechanism for
wide distribution of government information that guarantees basic availability
to the public.  Executive branch agencies support the depository library
program both as a matter of law and on its merits as a means of informing the
public about the government.  On the other hand, the law places the
administration of depository libraries with GPO.  Agency responsibility for
the depository libraries is limited to supplying government publications
through GPO.  

Agencies can improve their performance in providing government publications as
well as electronic information dissemination products to the depository
library program.  For example, the proliferation of "desktop publishing"
technology in recent years has afforded the opportunity for many agencies to
produce their own printed documents.  Many such documents may properly belong
in the depository libraries but are not sent because they are not printed at
GPO.  The policy requires agencies to establish management controls to ensure
that the appropriate documents reach the GPO for inclusion in the depository
library program.

At present, few agencies provide electronic information dissemination products
to the depository libraries.  At the same time, a small but growing number of
information dissemination products are disseminated only in electronic format. 


OMB believes that, as a matter of policy,  electronic information
dissemination products generally should be provided to the depository
libraries.  Given that production and supply of information dissemination
products to the depository libraries is primarily the responsibility of GPO,
agencies should provide appropriate electronic information dissemination
products to GPO for inclusion in the depository library program.

While cost may be a consideration, agencies should not conclude without
investigation that it would be prohibitively expensive to place their
electronic information dissemination products in the depository libraries. 
For electronic information dissemination products other than on-line services,
agencies may have the option of having GPO produce the information
dissemination product for them, in which case GPO would pay for depository
library costs.  Agencies should consider this option if it would be a cost
effective alternative to the agency making its own arrangements for production
of the information dissemination product.  Using GPO's services in this manner
is voluntary and at the agency's discretion.  Agencies could also consider
negotiating other terms, such as inviting GPO to participate in agency
procurement orders in order to distribute the necessary copies for the
depository libraries.  With adequate advance planning, agencies should be able
to provide electronic information dissemination products to the depository
libraries at nominal cost.

In a particular case, substantial cost may be a legitimate reason for not
providing an electronic information dissemination product to the depository
library program.  For example, for an agency with a substantial number of
existing titles of electronic information dissemination products, furnishing
copies of each to the depository libraries could be prohibitively expensive. 
In that situation, the agency should endeavor to make available those titles
with the greatest general interest, value, and utility to the public. 
Substantial cost could also be an impediment in the case of some on-line
information services where the costs associated with operating centralized
databases would make provision of unlimited direct access to numerous users
prohibitively expensive.  In both cases, agencies should consult with the GPO,
in order to identify those information dissemination products with the
greatest public interest and utility for dissemination.  In all cases,
however, where an agency discontinues publication of an information
dissemination product in paper format in favor of electronic formats, the
agency should work with the GPO to ensure availability of the information
dissemination product to depository libraries.

Notice to the Public.  Sections 8a(6)(i) and (j) present new practices for
agencies to observe in communicating with the public about information
dissemination.  Among agencies' responsibilities for dissemination is an
active knowledge of, and regular consultation with, the users of their
information dissemination products.  A primary reason for communication with
users is to gain their contribution to improving the quality and relevance of
government information -- how it is created, collected, and disseminated. 
Consultations with users might include participation at conferences and
workshops, careful attention to correspondence and telephone communications
(e.g., logging and analyzing inquiries), or formalized user surveys.

A key part of communicating with the public is providing adequate notice of
agency information dissemination plans. Because agencies' information
dissemination actions affect other agencies as well as the public, agencies
must forewarn other agencies of significant actions.  The decision to
initiate, terminate, or substantially modify the content, form, frequency, or
availability of significant products should also trigger appropriate advance
public notice.  Where appropriate, the Government Printing Office should be
notified directly. Information dissemination products deemed not to be
significant require no advance notice.

Examples of significant products (or changes to them) might be those that:

(a) are required by law; e.g., a statutorily mandated report to Congress;

(b) involve expenditure of substantial funds;

(c) by reason of the nature of the information, are matters of continuing
public interest; e.g., a key economic indicator;

(d) by reason of the time value of the information, command public interest;
e.g., monthly crop reports on the day of their release;

(e)will be disseminated in a new format or medium; e.g., disseminating a
printed product in electronic medium, or disseminating a machine-readable data
file via on-line access.

Where members of the public might consider a proposed new agency product
unnecessary or duplicative, the agency should solicit and evaluate public
comments.  Where users of an agency information dissemination product may be
seriously affected by the introduction of a change in medium or format, the
agency should notify users and consider their views before instituting the
change.  Where members of the public consider an existing agency product
important and necessary, the agency should consider these views before
deciding to terminate the product.  In all cases, however, determination of
what is a significant information dissemination product and what constitutes
adequate notice are matters of agency judgment.

Achieving Compliance with the Circular's Requirements. Section 8a(6)(k)
requires that the agency information dissemination management system ensure
that, to the extent existing information dissemination policies or practices
are inconsistent with the requirements of this Circular, an orderly transition
to compliance with the requirements of this Circular is made.  For example,
some agency information dissemination products may be priced at a level which
exceeds the cost of dissemination, or the agency may be engaged in practices
which are otherwise unduly restrictive.  In these instances, agencies must
plan for an orderly transition to the substantive policy requirements of the
Circular.  The information dissemination management system must be capable of
identifying these situations and planning for a reasonably prompt transition. 
Instances of existing agency practices which cannot immediately be brought
into conformance with the requirements of the Circular are to be addressed
through the waiver procedures of Section 10(b).  

Section 8a(7).  Avoiding Improperly Restrictive Practices. Federal agencies
are often the sole suppliers of the information they hold.  The agencies have
either created or collected the information using public funds, usually in
furtherance of unique governmental functions, and no one else has it.  Hence
agencies need to take care that their behavior does not inappropriately
constrain public access to government information.

When agencies use private contractors to accomplish dissemination, they must
take care that they do not permit contractors to impose restrictions that
undercut the agencies' discharge of their information dissemination
responsibilities. The contractual terms should assure that, with respect to
dissemination, the contractor behaves as though the contractor were the
agency.  For example, an agency practice of selling, through a contractor, on-
line access to a database but refusing to sell copies of the database itself
may be improperly restrictive because it precludes the possibility of another
firm making the same service available to the public at a lower price.  If an
agency is willing to provide public access to a database, the agency should be
willing to sell copies of the database itself.

By the same reasoning, agencies should behave in an even-handed manner in
handling information dissemination products.  If an agency is willing to sell
a database or database services to some members of the public, the agency
should sell the same products under similar terms to other members of the
public, unless prohibited by statute.  When an agency decides it has public
policy reasons for offering different terms of sale to different groups in the
public, the agency should provide a clear statement of the policy and its
basis.

Agencies should not attempt to exert control over the secondary uses of their
information dissemination products.  In particular, agencies should not
establish exclusive, restricted, or other distribution arrangements which
interfere with timely and equitable availability of information dissemination
products, and should not charge fees or royalties for the resale or
redissemination of government information.  These principles follow from the
fact that the law prohibits the Federal Government from exercising copyright. 


Agencies should inform the public as to the limitations inherent in the
information dissemination product (e.g., possibility of errors, degree of
reliability, and validity) so that users are fully aware of the quality and
integrity of the information.  If circumstances warrant, an agency may wish to
establish a procedure by which disseminators of the agency's information may
at their option have the data and/or value-added processing checked for
accuracy and certified by the agency.  Using this method, redisseminators of
the data would be able to respond to the demand for integrity from purchasers
and users.  This approach could be enhanced by the agency using its authority
to trademark its information dissemination product, and requiring that
redisseminators who wish to use the trademark agree to appropriate integrity
procedures.  These methods have the possibility of promoting diversity, user
responsiveness, and efficiency as well as integrity.  However, an agency's
responsibility to protect against misuse of a government information
dissemination product does not extend to restricting or regulating how the
public actually uses the information.  

The Lanham Trademark Act of 1946, 15 U.S.C. 1055, 1125, 1127, provides an
efficient method to address legitimate agency concerns regarding public
safety.  Specifically, the Act permits a trademark owner to license the mark,
and to demand that the user maintain appropriate quality controls over
products reaching consumers under the mark.  See generally, McCarthy on
Trademarks, Sec. 18.13.  When a trademark owner licenses the trademark to
another, it may retain the right to control the quality of goods sold under
the trademark by the licensee.  Furthermore, if a licensee sells goods under
the licensed trademark in breach of the licensor's quality specifications, the
licensee may be  liable for breach of contract as well as for trademark
infringement.  This technique is increasingly being used to assure the
integrity of digital information dissemination products.  For example, the
Census Bureau has trademarked its topologically integrated geographic encoding
and referencing data product ("TIGER/Line"), which is used as official source
data for legislative districting and other sensitive applications.  

Whenever a need for special quality control procedures is identified, agencies
should adopt the least burdensome methods and ensure that the methods chosen
do not establish an exclusive, restricted, or other distribution arrangement
that interferes with timely and equitable availability of public information
to the public. Agencies should not attempt to condition the resale or
redissemination of its information dissemination products by members of the
public.  

User charges.  Title 5 of the Independent Offices Appropriations Act of 1952
(31 U.S.C. 9701) establishes Federal policy regarding fees assessed for
government services, and for sale or use of government property or resources. 
OMB Circular No. A-25, User Charges, implements the statute.  It provides for
charges for government goods and services that convey special benefits to
recipients beyond those accruing to the general public.  It also establishes
that user charges should be set at a level sufficient to recover the full cost
of providing the service, resource, or property.  Since Circular No. A-25 is
silent as to the extent of its application to government information
dissemination products, full cost recovery for information dissemination
products might be interpreted to include the cost of collecting and processing
information rather than just the cost of dissemination.  The policy in Section
8a(7)(c) clarifies the policy of Circular No. A-25 as it applies to
information dissemination products.  This policy was codified by the Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1995 at 35 U.S.C. Section 3506(d)(4)(D).

Statutes such as FOIA and the Government in the Sunshine Act establish a broad
and general obligation on the part of Federal agencies to make government
information available to the public and to avoid erecting barriers that impede
public access.  User charges higher than the cost of dissemination may be a
barrier to public access.  The economic benefit to society is maximized when
government information is publicly disseminated at the cost of dissemination. 
Absent statutory requirements to the contrary, the general standard for user
charges for government information dissemination products should be to recover
no more than the cost of dissemination.  It should be noted in this connection
that the government has already incurred the costs of creating and processing
the information for governmental purposes in order to carry out its mission.

Underpinning this standard is the FOIA fee structure which establishes limits
on what agencies can charge for access to Federal records.  That Act permits
agencies to charge only the direct reasonable cost of search, reproduction
and, in certain cases, review of requested records.  In the case of FOIA
requests for information dissemination products, charges would be limited to
reasonable direct reproduction costs alone.  No search would be needed to find
the product, thus no search fees would be charged.  Neither would the record
need to be reviewed to determine if it could be withheld under one of the
Act's exemptions since the agency has already decided to release it.  Thus,
FOIA provides an information "safety net" for the public.
  
While OMB does not intend to prescribe procedures for pricing government
information dissemination products, the cost of dissemination may generally be
thought of as the sum of all costs specifically associated with preparing a
product for dissemination and actually disseminating it to the public.  When
an agency prepares an information product for its own internal use, costs
associated with such production would not generally be recoverable as user
charges on subsequent dissemination.  When the agency prepares the product for
public dissemination, and disseminates it, costs associated with preparation
and actual dissemination would be recoverable as user charges.

In the case of government databases which are made available to the public on-
line, the costs associated with initial database development, including the
costs of the necessary hardware and software, would not be included in the
cost of dissemination.  Once a decision is made to disseminate the data,
additional costs logically associated with dissemination can be included in
the user fee.  These may include costs associated with modification of the
database to make it suitable for dissemination, any hardware or software
enhancements necessary for dissemination, and costs associated with providing
customer service or telecommunications capacity.

In the case of information disseminated via cd-rom, the costs associated with
initial database development would likewise not be included in the cost of
dissemination.  However, a portion of the costs associated with formatting the
data for cd-rom dissemination and the costs of mastering the cd-rom, could
logically be included as part of the dissemination cost, as would the cost
associated with licensing appropriate search software.

Determining the appropriate user fee is the responsibility of each agency, and
involves the exercise of judgment and  reliance on reasonable estimates. 
Agencies should be able to explain how they arrive at user fees which
represent average prices and which, given the likely demand for the product,
can be expected to recover the costs associated with dissemination.  

When agencies provide custom tailored information services to specific
individuals or groups, full cost recovery, including the cost of collection
and processing, is appropriate.  For example, if an agency prepares special
tabulations or similar services from its databases in answer to a specific
request from the public, all costs associated with fulfilling the request
would be charged, and the requester should be so informed before work is
begun.

In a few cases, agencies engaging in information collection activities augment
the information collection at the request of, and with funds provided by,
private sector groups.  Since the 1920's, the Bureau of the Census has carried
out, on request, surveys of certain industries at greater frequency or at a
greater level of detail than Federal funding would permit, because gathering
the additional information is consistent with Federal purposes and industry
groups have paid the additional information collection and processing costs. 
While the results of these surveys are disseminated to the public at the cost
of dissemination, the existence and availability of the additional government
data are special benefits to certain recipients beyond those accruing to the
public.  It is appropriate that those recipients should bear the full costs of
information collection and processing, in addition to the normal costs of
dissemination.

Agencies must balance the requirement to establish user charges and the level
of fees charged against other policies, specifically, the proper performance
of agency functions and the need to ensure that information dissemination
products reach the public for whom they are intended.  If an agency mission
includes disseminating information to certain specific groups or members of
the public and the agency determines that user charges will constitute a
significant barrier to carrying out this responsibility, the agency may have
grounds for reducing or eliminating its user charges for the information
dissemination product, or for exempting some recipients from the charge.  Such
reductions or eliminations should be the subject of agency determinations on a
case by case basis and justified in terms of agency policies.

Section 8a(8).  Electronic Information Dissemination.  Advances in information
technology have changed government information dissemination.  Agencies now
have available new media and formats for dissemination, including CD-ROM,
electronic bulletin boards, and public networks.  The growing public
acceptance of electronic data interchange (EDI) and similar standards enhances
their attractiveness as methods for government information dissemination.  For
example, experiments with the use of electronic bulletin boards to advertise
Federal contracting opportunities and to receive vendor quotes have achieved
wider dissemination of information about business opportunities with the
Federal Government than has been the case with traditional notices and
advertisements.  Improved information dissemination has increased the number
of firms expressing interest in participating in the government market and
decreased prices to the government due to expanded competition.  In addition,
the development of public electronic information networks, such as the
Internet, provides an additional way for agencies to increase the diversity of
information sources available to the public.  Emerging applications such as
Wide Area Information Servers and the World-wide Web (using the NISO Z39.50
standard) will be used increasingly to facilitate dissemination of government
information such as environmental data, international trade information, and
economic statistics in a networked environment.

A basic purpose of the PRA is to "provide for the dissemination of public
information on a timely basis, on equitable terms, and in a manner that
promotes the utility of the information to the public and makes effective use
of information technology."  (44 U.S.C. 3501(7))  Agencies can frequently
enhance the value, practical utility, and timeliness of government information
as a national resource by disseminating information in electronic media. 
Electronic collection and dissemination may substantially increase the
usefulness of government information dissemination products for three reasons. 
First, information disseminated electronically is likely to be more timely and
accurate because it does not require data re-entry.  Second, electronic
records often contain more complete and current information because, unlike
paper, it is relatively easy to make frequent changes.  Finally, because
electronic information is more easily manipulated by the user and can be
tailored to a wide variety of needs, electronic information dissemination
products are more useful to the recipients.

As stated at Section 8a(1)(h), agencies should use voluntary standards and
Federal Information Processing Standards to the extent appropriate in order to
ensure the most cost effective and widespread dissemination of information in
electronic formats.

Agencies can frequently make government information more accessible to the
public and enhance the utility of government information as a national
resource by disseminating information in electronic media.  Agencies generally
do not utilize data in raw form, but edit, refine, and organize the data in
order to make it more accessible and useful for their own purposes. 
Information is made more accessible to users by aggregating data into logical
groupings, tagging data with descriptive and other identifiers, and developing
indexing and retrieval systems to facilitate access to particular data within
a larger file.  As a general matter, and subject to budgetary, security or
legal constraints, agencies should make available such features developed for
internal agency use as part of their information dissemination products.

There will also be situations where the agency determines that its mission
will be furthered by providing enhancements beyond those needed for its own
use, particularly those that will improve the public availability of
government information over the long term.  In these instances, the agency
should evaluate the expected usefulness of the enhanced information in light
of its mission, and where appropriate construct partnerships with the private
sector to add these elements of value.  This approach may be particularly
appropriate as part of a strategy to utilize new technology enhancements, such
as graphic images, as part of a particular dissemination program.

Section 8a(9).  Information Safeguards.  The basic premise of this Section is
that agencies should provide an appropriate level of protection to government
information, given an assessment of the risks associated with its maintenance
and use.  Among the factors to be considered include meeting the specific
requirements of the Privacy Act of 1974 and the Computer Security Act of 1987.


In particular, agencies are to ensure that they meet the requirements of the
Privacy Act regarding information retrievable by individual identifier.  Such
information is to be collected, maintained, and protected so as to preclude
intrusion into the privacy of individuals and the unwarranted disclosure of
personal information.  Individuals must be accorded access and amendment
rights to records, as provided in the Privacy Act.  To the extent that
agencies share information which they have a continuing obligation to protect,
agencies should see that appropriate safeguards are instituted.  Appendix I
prescribes agency procedures for the maintenance of records about individuals,
reporting requirements to OMB and Congress, and other special requirements of
specific agencies, in accordance with the Privacy Act.

This Section also incorporates the requirement of the Computer Security Act of
1987 that agencies plan to secure their systems commensurate with the risk and
magnitude of loss or harm that could result from the loss, misuse, or
unauthorized access to information contained in those systems.  It includes
assuring the integrity, availability, and appropriate confidentiality of
information.  It also involves protection against the harm that could occur to
individuals or entities outside of the Federal Government as well as the harm
to the Federal Government.  Appendix III prescribes a minimum set of controls
to be included in Federal automated information resources security programs
and assigns Federal agency responsibilities for the security of automated
information resources.  The Section also includes limits on collection and
sharing of information and procedures to assure the integrity of information
as well as requirements to adequately secure the information.  

Incorporation of Circular No. A-114.  OMB Circular No. A-114, Management of
Federal Audiovisual Activities, last revised on March 20, 1985, prescribed
policies and procedures to improve Federal audiovisual management.  Although
OMB has rescinded Circular No. A-114, its essential policies and procedures 
continue.  This revision provides information resources management policies
and principles independent of medium, including paper, electronic, or
audiovisual.  By including the term "audiovisual" in the definition of
"information," audiovisual materials are incorporated into all policies of
this Circular.

The requirement in Circular No. A-114 that the head of each agency designate
an office with responsibility for the management oversight of an agency's
audiovisual productions and that an appropriate program for the management of
audiovisual productions in conformance with 36 CFR 1232.4 is incorporated into
this Circular at Section 9a(10).  The requirement that audiovisual activities
be obtained consistent with OMB Circular No. A-76 is covered by Sections
8a(1)(d), 8a(5)(d)(i) and 8a(6)(b).

The National Archives and Records Administration will continue to prescribe
the records management and archiving practices of agencies with respect to
audiovisual productions at 36 CFR 1232.4, "Audiovisual Records Management." Section 8b. Information Systems and Information Technology Management

Section 8b(1).  Evaluation and Performance Measurement.  OMB encourages
agencies to stress several types of evaluation in their oversight of
information systems.  As a first step, agencies must assess the continuing
need for the mission function. If the agency determines there is a continuing
need for a function, agencies should reevaluate existing work processes prior
to creating new or updating existing information systems.  Without this
analysis, agencies tend to develop information systems that improve the
efficiency of traditional paper-based processes which may be no longer needed. 
The application of information technology presents an opportunity to
reevaluate existing organizational structures, work processes, and ways of
interacting with the public to see whether they still efficiently and
effectively support the agency's mission. 

Benefit-cost analyses provide vital management information on the most
efficient allocation of human, financial, and information resources to support
agency missions.  Agencies should conduct a benefit-cost analysis for each
information system to support management decision making to ensure: (a)
alignment of the planned information system with the agency's mission needs;
(b) acceptability of information system implementation to users inside the
Government; (c) accessibility to clientele outside the Government; and (d)
realization of projected benefits.  When preparing benefit-cost analyses to
support investments in information technology, agencies should seek to
quantify the improvements in agency performance results through the
measurement of program outputs.

The requirement to conduct a benefit-cost analysis need not become a
burdensome activity for agencies.  The level of detail necessary for such
analyses varies greatly and depends on the nature of the proposed investment. 
Proposed investments in "major information systems" as defined in this
Circular require detailed and rigorous analysis.  This analysis should not
merely serve as budget justification material, but should be part of the
ongoing management oversight process to ensure prudent allocation of scarce
resources.  Proposed investments for information systems that are not
considered "major information systems"  should be analyzed and documented more
informally.  

While it is not necessary to create a new benefit-cost analysis at each stage
of the information system life cycle, it is useful to refresh these analyses
with up-to-date information to ensure the continued viability of an
information system prior to and during implementation.  Reasons for updating a
benefit-cost analysis may include such factors as significant changes in
projected costs and benefits, significant changes in information technology
capabilities, major changes in requirements (including legislative or
regulatory changes), or empirical data based on performance measurement gained
through prototype results or pilot experience.

Agencies should also weigh the relative benefits of proposed investments in
information technology across the agency.  Given the fiscal constraints facing
the Federal government in the upcoming years, agencies should fund a portfolio
of investments across the agency that maximizes return on investment for the
agency as a whole.  Agencies should also emphasize those proposed investments
that show the greatest probability (i.e., display the lowest financial and
operational risk) of achieving anticipated benefits for the organization.  OMB
and GAO are creating a publication that will provide agencies with reference
materials for setting up such evaluation processes. 

Agencies should complete a retrospective evaluation of information systems
once operational to validate projected savings, changes in practices, and
effectiveness in serving affected publics.  These post-implementation reviews
may also serve as the basis for agency-wide learning about effective
management practices.

Section 8b(2).  Strategic Information Resources Management (IRM) Planning. 
Agencies should link to, and to the extent possible, integrate IRM planning
with the agency strategic planning required by the Government Performance and
Results Act (P.L. 103-62).  Such a linkage ensures that agencies apply
information resources to programs that support the achievement of agreed-upon
mission goals.  Additionally, strategic IRM planning by agencies may help
avoid automating out-of-date, ineffective, or inefficient procedures and work
processes. 
  
Agencies should also devote management attention to operational information
resources management planning.  This operational IRM planning should provide a
one to five year focus to agency IRM activities and projects.  Agency
operational IRM plans should also provide a listing of the major information
systems covered by the management oversight processes described in Section
8b(3).  Agency operational planning for IRM should also communicate to the
public how the agency's application of information resources might affect
them.  For the contractor community, this includes articulating the agency's
intent to acquire information technology from the private sector.  These data
should not be considered acquisition sensitive, so that they can be
distributed as widely as possible to the vendor community in order to promote
competition.  Agencies should make these acquisition plans available to the
public through government-wide information dissemination mechanisms, including
electronic means.

Operational planning should also include initiatives to reduce the burden,
including information collection burden, an agency imposes on the public.  Too
often, for example, agencies require personal visits to government offices
during office hours inconvenient to the public.  Instead, agencies should plan
to use information technology in ways that make the public's dealing with the
Federal government as "user-friendly" as possible.  

Each year, OMB issues a bulletin requesting copies of agencies' latest
strategic IRM plans and annual updates to operational plans for information
and information technology.

Section 8b(3). Information Systems Management Oversight.  Agencies should
consider what constitutes a "major information system" for purposes of this
Circular when determining the appropriate level of management attention for an
information system.  The anticipated dollar size of an information system or a
supporting acquisition is only one determinant of the level of management
attention an information system requires.  Additional criteria to assess
include the maturity and stability of the technology under consideration, how
well defined user requirements are, the level of stability of program and user
requirements, and security concerns.  

For instance, certain risky or "cutting-edge" information systems require
closer scrutiny and more points of review and evaluation.  This is
particularly true when an agency uses an evolutionary life cycle strategy that
requires a technical and financial evaluation of the project's viability at
prototype and pilot testing phases.  Projects relying on commercial off-the-
shelf technology and applications will generally require less oversight than
those using custom-designed software.

While each phase of an information system life cycle may have unique
characteristics, the dividing line between the phases may not always be
distinct.  For instance, both planning and evaluation should continue
throughout the information system life cycle.  In fact, during any phase, it
may be necessary to revisit the previous stages based on new information or
changes in the environment in which the system is being developed.  

The policy statements in this Circular describe an information system life
cycle.  It does not, however, make a definitive statement that there must be
four versus five phases of a life cycle because the life cycle varies by the
nature of the information system.  Only two phases are common to all
information systems - a beginning and an end.  As a result, life cycle
management techniques that agencies can use may vary depending on the
complexity and risk inherent in the project.

One element of this management oversight policy is the recognition of imbedded
and/or parallel life cycles.  Within an information system's life cycle there
may be other subsidiary life cycles.  For instance, most Federal information
systems projects include an acquisition of goods and services that have life
cycle characteristics.  Some projects include software development components,
which also have life cycles.  Effective management oversight of major
information systems requires a recognition of all these various life cycles
and an integrated information systems management oversight with the budget and
human resource management cycles that exist in the agency.

Section 8b(2) of the Circular underscores the need for agencies to bring an
agency-wide perspective to a number of information resources management
issues.  These issues include policy formulation, planning, management and
technical frameworks for using information resources, and management oversight
of major information systems.  Agencies should also provide for coordinated
decision making (Section 8b(3)(f)) in order to bring together the perspectives
from across an agency, and outside if appropriate.  Such coordination may take
place in an agency-wide management or IRM committee.  Interested groups
typically include functional users, managers of financial and human resources,
information resources management specialists, and, as appropriate, the
affected public.

Section 8b(4).  Use of Information Resources.  Agency management of
information resources should be guided by management and technical frameworks
for agency-wide information and information technology needs.  The technical
framework should serve as a reference for updates to existing and new
information systems.  The management framework should assure the integration
of proposed information systems projects into the technical framework in a
manner that will ensure progress towards achieving an open systems
environment.  Agency strategic IRM planning should describe the parameters
(e.g., technical standards) of such a technical framework.  The management
framework should drive operational planning and should describe how the agency
intends to use information and information technology consistent with the
technical framework. 

Agency management and technical frameworks for information resources should
address agency strategies to move toward an open systems environment.  These
strategies should consist of one or multiple profiles (an internally
consistent set of standards), based on the current version of the NIST's
Application Portability Profile.  These profiles should satisfy user
requirements, accommodate officially recognized or de facto standards, and
promote interoperability, application portability, and scalability by defining
interfaces, services, protocols, and data formats favoring the use of
nonproprietary specifications.

Agencies should focus on how to better utilize the data they currently collect
from the public.  Because agencies generally do not share information, the
public often must respond to duplicative information collections from various
agencies or their components.  Sharing of information about individuals should
be consistent with the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, and Appendix I of this
Circular.

Services provided by IPSOs to components of their own agency are often
perceived to be "free" by the service recipients because their costs are
budgeted as an "overhead" charge.  Service recipients typically do not pay for
IPSO services based on actual usage.  Since the services are perceived to be
free, there is very little incentive for either the service recipients or the
IPSO managers to be watchful for opportunities to improve productivity or to
reduce costs.  Agencies are encouraged to institute chargeback mechanisms for
IPSOs that provide common information processing services across a number of
agency components when the resulting economies are expected to exceed the cost
of administration. 

Section 8b(5).  Acquisition of Information Technology.  Consistent with the
requirements of the Brooks Act and the Paperwork Reduction Act, agencies
should acquire information technology to improve service delivery, reduce the
cost of Federal program administration, and minimize burden of dealing with
the Federal government.  Agencies may wish to ask potential offerors to
propose different technical solutions and approaches to fulfilling agency
mission requirements.  Evaluating acquisitions of information technology must
assess both the benefits and costs of applying technology to meet such
requirements.

    The distinction between information system life cycles and acquisition life
cycles is important when considering the implications of OMB Circular A-109,
Acquisition of Major Systems, to the acquisition of information resources. 
Circular A-109 presents one strategy for acquiring information technology
when:

i) The agency intends to fund operational tests and demonstrations of system
design;

ii) The risk is high due to the unproven integration of custom designed
software and/or hardware components; 

iii) The estimated cost savings or operational improvements from such a
demonstration will further improve the return on investment; or

iv) The agency wants to acquire a solution based on state-of-the-art, unproven
technology.
  
Agencies should comply with OMB Circular A-76, Performance of Commercial
Activities, when considering conversion to or from in-house or contract
performance.

Agencies should ensure that acquisitions for new information technology comply
with GSA regulations concerning information technology accessibility for
individuals with disabilities [41 C.F.R. 201-20.103-7].

Section 9a(11).  Ombudsman.  The senior agency official designated by the head
of each agency under 44 U.S.C. 3506(a) is charged with carrying out the
responsibilities of the agency under the PRA.  Agency senior information
resources management officials are responsible for ensuring that their agency
practices are in compliance with OMB policies.  It is envisioned that the
agency senior information resources management official will work as an
ombudsman to investigate alleged instances of agency failure to adhere to the
policies set forth in the Circular and to recommend or take corrective action
as appropriate.  Agency heads should continue to use existing mechanisms to
ensure compliance with laws and policies.

Section 9b. International Relationships.  The information policies contained
in the PRA and Circular A-130 are based on the premise that government
information is a valuable national resource, and that the economic benefits to
society are maximized when government information is available in a timely and
equitable manner to all.  Maximizing the benefits of government information to
society depends, in turn, on fostering diversity among the entities involved
in disseminating it.  These include for-profit and not-for-profit entities,
such as information vendors and libraries, as well as State, local and tribal
governments.  The policies on charging the cost of dissemination and against
restrictive practices contained in the PRA and Circular A-130 are aimed at
achieving this goal.

Other nations do not necessarily share these values.  Although an increasing
number are embracing the concept of equitable and unrestricted access to
public information -- particularly scientific, environmental, and geographic
information of great public benefit -- other nations are treating their
information as a commodity to be þcommercializedþ.  Whereas the Copyright Act,
17 U.S.C. 105, has long provided that "[c]opyright protection under this title
is not available for any work of the United States Government," some other
nations take advantage of their domestic copyright laws that do permit
government copyright and assert a monopoly on certain categories of
information in order to maximize revenues.  Such arrangements tend to preclude
other entities from developing markets for the information or otherwise
disseminating the information in the public interest.

Thus, Federal agencies involved in international data exchanges are sometimes
faced with problems in disseminating data stemming from differing national
treatment of government copyright.  For example, one country may attempt to
condition the sharing of data with a Federal agency on an agreement that the
agency will withhold release of the information or otherwise restrict its
availability to the public.  Since the Freedom of Information Act does not
provide a categorical exemption for copyrighted information, and Federal
agencies have neither the authority nor capability to enforce restrictions on
behalf of other nations, agencies faced with such restrictive conditions lack
clear guidance as to how to respond.

The results of the July 1995 Congress of the World Meteorological
Organization, which sought to strike a balance of interests in this area, are
instructive.  Faced with a resolution which would have essentially required
member nations to enforce restrictions on certain categories of information
for the commercial benefit of other nations, the United States proposed a
compromise which was ultimately accepted.  The compromise explicitly affirmed
the general principle that government meteorological information -- like all
other scientific, technical and environmental information -- should be shared
globally without restriction; but recognized that individual nations may in
particular cases apply their own domestic copyright and similar laws to
prevent what they deem to be unfair or inappropriate competition within their
own territories.  This compromise leaves open the door for further
consultation as to whether the future of government information policy in a
global information infrastructure should follow the þopen and unrestricted
accessþ model embraced by the United States and a number of other nations, or
if it should follow the þgovernment commercializationþ model of others.

Accordingly, since the PRA and Circular A-130 are silent as to how agencies
should respond to similar situations, we are providing the following
suggestions.  They are intended to foster globally the open and unrestricted
information policy embraced by the United States and like minded nations,
while permitting agencies to have access to data provided by foreign
governments with restrictive conditions.

Release by a Federal agency of copyrighted information, whether under a FOIA
request or otherwise, does not affect any rights the copyright holder might
otherwise possess.  Accordingly, agencies should inform any concerned foreign
governments that their copyright claims may be enforceable under United States
law, but that the agency is not authorized to prosecute any such claim on
behalf of the foreign government.  

Whenever an agency seeks to negotiate an international agreement in which a
foreign party seeks to impose restrictive practices on information to be
exchanged, the agency should first coordinate with the State Department.  The
State Department will work with the agency to develop the least restrictive
terms consistent with United States policy, and ensure that those terms
receive full interagency clearance through the established process for
granting agencies authority to negotiate and conclude international
agreements.  

Finally, whenever an agency is attending meetings of international or
multilateral organizations where restrictive practices are being proposed as
binding on member states, the agency should coordinate with the State
Department, the Office of Management and Budget, the Office of Science and
Technology Policy, or the U.S. Trade Representative, as appropriate, before
expressing a position on behalf of the United States. 
