-------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACM CCS 2011 --- CALL for WORKSHOP PROPOSALS

Proposals are solicited for workshops to be held in conjunction with ACM CCS 2011. Each workshop
provides a forum to address a specific topic at the forefront of security research.

A workshop must be one full day in length. Proceedings of all workshops will be available (on a
CD) to the workshop attendees. Each workshop will also have on-line proceedings through ACM
Digital Library, with a separate ISBN.

Workshop Proposal Submission

For new workshops, proposals should include:

* Workshop title
* A draft  "Call for Papers" articulating the scope and topics  covered by the workshop
* A brief summary and justification for the workshop, including anticipated benefits to the ACM
CCS community.
* Proposed format and agenda
* Expected number of submissions and acceptance rate
* Expected number of attendees
* Program chair(s), and, if available, tentative program committee
* A one-paragraph biographical sketch for each organizer, describing relevant qualifications,
  including research and conference/workshop organizing experience

For previously-held workshops, in addition to the above, proposals must provide the following
information, for the most recent incarnation of the workshop:

* Number of submissions
* Number of accepted papers
* Estimated number of attendees

Please submit workshop proposals by email to the ACM CCS Workshop Chairs, Ninghui Li 
(ninghui@cs.purdue.edu) and Venkat Venkatakrishnan (venkat@uic.edu). All workshop proposals 
will be reviewed by the CCS Steering Committee.

Proposal Evaluation Criteria

* The workshop is within the scope of computer and communications security and concerns 
a coherent and important technical topic of high interest in the community.
* Its novelty with respect to other forums, especially with respect to other CCS workshops.
* Its likely impact on the target community, including likely high participation.
* One of the best ways to show likely interest is to have a strong set of researchers who have
agreed to serve on the PC.

Important Dates

* Submission deadline: February 25, 2011 (early submissions are welcome)
* Decisions communicated: March 6, 2011

* CFP and Website for each workshop by March 15- 25
* Suggested workshop papers submission deadline: around July 2
* Suggested workshop papers notification: before August 10
* Workshop papers camera ready: August 25 (hard deadline)


CCS Support for Workshops:

If a workshop proposal is accepted, the ACM CCS workshop chairs will work closely with workshop
organizers. The ACM CCS workshop chairs will try to obtain funding to support student travel 
awards and invited speakers.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------
18th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (ACM CCS 2011)
CALL FOR PAPERS
OCTOBER 17 - 21, 2011
SWISSOTEL Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA 
http://sigsac.org/ccs/CCS2011

The annual ACM Computer and Communications Security Conference is
a leading international forum for information security researchers,
practitioners, developers, and users to explore cutting-edge ideas
and results, and to exchange techniques, tools, and experiences. The
conference seeks submissions from academia, government, and industry
presenting novel research on all practical and theoretical aspects
of computer and communications security. Papers should have relevance to
the construction, evaluation, application, or operation of secure
systems. Theoretical papers must make a convincing argument for the
practical significance of the results. All topic areas related to computer
and communications security are of interest and in scope. Accepted papers
will be published by ACM Press in the conference proceedings. Outstanding
papers will be invited for possible publication in a special issue of
the ACM Transactions on Information and System Security.

Paper Submission Process

Submissions must be made by the deadline of May 6, 2011, through the
website: 

http://www.easychair.org/conferences/?conf=ccs2011

The review process will be carried out in two phases and authors will
have an opportunity to comment on the first-phase reviews.  Authors will
be notified of the first-phase reviews on Monday, June 20, 2011 and can
send back their comments by Thursday, June 23, 2011.

Submitted papers must not substantially overlap papers that have been
published or that are simultaneously submitted to a journal, conference
or workshop. Simultaneous submission of the same work is not allowed.

Authors of accepted papers must guarantee that their papers will be
presented at the conference.

Paper Format

Submissions must be at most 10 pages in double-column ACM format (note:
pages must be numbered) excluding the bibliography and well-marked
appendices, and at most 12 pages overall. Submissions must NOT be
anonymized. Only PDF or Postscript files will be accepted. Submissions
not meeting these guidelines risk rejection without consideration of
their merits.

Tutorial Submissions

Proposals for long (3-hour) and short (1.5-hour) tutorials on research
topics of current and emerging interest should be submitted electronically
to the tutorials chair by May 24, 2010. The guidelines for tutorial
proposals can be found on the website.

Important Dates

- Paper submission due: Friday, May 6, 2011 (23:59 UTC - 11)
- First round reviews communicated to authors: Monday, June 20, 2011
- Author comments due on: Thursday, June 23, 2011 (23:59 UTC - 11)
- Acceptance notification: Friday, July 15, 2011
- Final papers due: Thursday, August 11, 2011 

GENERAL CHAIR:

Yan Chen (Northwestern University, USA)

PROGRAM CHAIRS:

George Danezis (Microsoft Research, UK)
Vitaly Shmatikov (University of Texas at Austin, USA)

PROGRAM COMMITTEE:

Michael Backes (Saarland University and MPI-SWS, Germany)
Bruno Blanchet (INRIA, Ecole Normale Superieure, and CNRS, France)
Dan Boneh (Stanford University, USA)
Nikita Borisov (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA)
Herbert Bos (VU, Netherlands)
Srdjan Capkun (ETHZ, Switzerland)
Avik Chaudhuri (Adobe Advanced Technology Labs, USA)
Shuo Chen (Microsoft Research, USA)
Manuel Costa (Microsoft Research, UK)
Anupam Datta (CMU, USA)
Stephanie Delaune (CNRS and ENS-Cachan, France)
Roger Dingledine (The Tor Project, USA)
Orr Dunkelman (University of Haifa and Weizmann Institute, Israel)
Ulfar Erlingsson (Google, USA)
Nick Feamster (Georgia Tech, USA)
Bryan Ford (Yale University, USA)
Cedric Fournet (Microsoft Research, UK)
Paul Francis (MPI-SWS, Germany)
Michael Freedman (Princeton University, USA)
Guofei Gu (Texas A&M University, USA)
Nicholas Hopper (University of Minnesota, USA)
Collin Jackson (CMU Silicon Valley, USA)
Markus Jakobsson (Paypal, USA)
Jaeyeon Jung (Intel Labs Seattle, USA)
Apu Kapadia (Indiana University Bloomington, USA)
Jonathan Katz (University of Maryland, USA)
Stefan Katzenbeisser (TU Darmstadt, Germany)
Arvind Krishnamurthy (University of Washington, USA)
Christopher Kruegel (University of California, Santa Barbara, USA)
Ralf Kuesters (University of Trier, Germany)
Ninghui Li (Purdue University, USA)
Benjamin Livshits (Microsoft Research, USA)
Heiko Mantel (TU Darmstadt, Germany)
John Mitchell (Stanford University, USA)
Fabian Monrose (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA)
Steven Murdoch (University of Cambridge, UK)
David Naccache (Ecole Normale Superieure, France)
Arvind Narayanan (Stanford University, USA)
Kenny Paterson (Royal Holloway, University of London, UK)
Niels Provos (Google, USA)
Mike Reiter (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA)
Thomas Ristenpart (University of Wisconsin, USA)
Hovav Shacham (University of California, San Diego, USA)
Adam Smith (Pennsylvania State University, USA)
Anil Somayaji (Carleton University, Canada)
Francois-Xavier Standaert (UCL, Belgium)
Eran Tromer (Tel Aviv University, Israel)
Leendert Van Doorn (AMD, USA)
Paul Van Oorschot (Carleton University, Canada)
Bogdan Warinschi (University of Bristol, UK)
Brent Waters (University of Texas at Austin, USA)
Robert Watson (University of Cambridge, United Kingdom)
Xiaowei Yang (Duke University, USA)
Haifeng Yu (National University of Singapore, Singapore)


