International Journal of Cyber Forensics and Advanced Threat Investigations- Call For Papers

[ - INTRODUCTION - ]

For years, we have witnessed blog posts and white papers from cybersecurity & forensics bloggers, who have made noticeable and novel contributions in these areas. However, their contributions have not properly cited or credited in academia or industry since these contributions do not contain linked references or citable identifiers. For this reason, we launched the "International Journal of Cyber Forensics and Advanced Threat Investigations" as a supporting forum for both theoretical and applied aspects of cybersecurity and cyberforensics.

[ - ABOUT THE JOURNAL - ]

"International Journal of Cyber Forensics and Advanced Threat Investigations", is the first open access, peer-reviewed, scholarly journal, created by professional hackers, and cybersecurity enthusiasts, and cyberforensics experts who strongly believe in the need to study tools, techniques, procedures, and methodologies of Red, Yellow, and Blue Teamers. We stress, there is a work of science behind every art. We are the first open access, peer-reviewed, scholarly journal, that is dedicated entirely to this aim. We make sure that every published research in the journal is cited properly and protected by "Creative Commons CC-BY-NC", a patent style copyright license. While at the same time be open access to the world (No subscription fees) and without any authors publication fees, or article processing fees.

[ - INFORMATION FOR AUTHORS - ]

The journal publishes original research, practical and review articles related to all areas of cybersecurity, digital forensics, incident response, and threat investigations.

The journal ensures that each published research will be properly cited, and protected by "Creative Commons CC-BY-NC" copyright license. Each Accepted article will have a unique identifier and will be abstracted and indexed in multiple international databases accessible for all academic and research communities of cybersecurity and cyber forensics to secure high visibility.

The journal is open access to the world and does not charge authors publication fees, article processing fees, or subscription fees.

The journal is pleased to welcome three kinds of manuscript submissions:
•	Research Articles,
•	Practical Articles,
•	Review Articles.

All submissions will be rigorously peer-reviewed. Please browse through the journal website to find out more information about the author's guidelines https://conceptechint.net/index.php/CFATI/about/submissions#onlineSubmissions

[ - Other information - ]

Kindly in any manuscript, submissions use the journal layout template either in 

Microsoft Word: https://conceptechint.net/CFATI-Word-template.zip
or 
LaTeX formats: https://conceptechint.net/CFATI-LaTeX-template.zip
