                       CSL BULLETIN
       Advising users on computer systems technology
                       October 1992


DISPOSITION OF SENSITIVE AUTOMATED INFORMATION
This CSL Bulletin discusses the sanitization of magnetic media
used to store sensitive information and supplements FIRMR
Bulletin C-22 on the security and privacy of federal information
processing resources, issued by the General Services
Administration on September 18, 1992.  Sanitization means the
removal of data from storage media so that, for all practical
purposes, the data cannot be retrieved.  Some instances in which
sanitization must be considered include whenever media is
transferred from one organization to another, when equipment is
declared surplus, and when organizations dispose of media.  

Much of the information in this CSL Bulletin was drawn from the
National Computer Security Center's A Guide to Understanding Data
Remanence in Automated Information Systems, (NCSC-TG-025, Library
No. S-236,082, Version 2) which provides specific technical
guidance.

Sanitization:  Why Be Concerned?
In the past, reports have surfaced that federal agencies have
disposed of surplus information technology (IT) equipment without
taking appropriate measures to erase the information stored on
the system's media.  This can lead to the disclosure of sensitive
information, embarrassment to the agency, costly investigations,
and other consequences which could have been avoided.  

Sharing of media within the government or between government and
contractors also presents security issues.  For example, IT
equipment is sometimes transferred between offices without first
removing sensitive files.  Diskettes may be used to transfer
documents or data files (e.g., for time and attendance reporting)
between offices with little concern for the other information
which may reside on the diskette.

Employees throw away old diskettes believing that "erasing" the
files on the diskette has made the data unretrievable.  In
reality, however, "erasing" a file simply removes the "pointer"
to that file.  The pointer tells the computer where the file is
physically stored on the disk.  Without this pointer, the files
will not appear on a directory listing of the diskette's files. 
This does not mean that the file was removed from the diskette. 
(Commonly available utility programs can often retrieve
information that is presumed "deleted.")  Fortunately, with
foresight and appropriate planning, these situations can be
avoided. 

Specific Agency Policies
FIRMR Bulletin C-22 states that federal agencies must establish
policies and procedures to ensure the proper disposition of
sensitive automated information.  Some factors to be considered
in developing agency policies are:

  o  Magnetic media may be exposed to unauthorized access at
     various times in the system life cycle.  When are exposures
     most likely to occur?  How do these exposures occur?  What
     types of data are at risk?  What procedures are appropriate
     for disposal of media for the agency's specific operating
     environment?   

  o  Contractors typically use their IT systems to process
     information owned by a federal agency.  Are policies or
     contractual mechanisms in place to adequately protect this
     information?  Contractors must be aware of the importance of
     implementing appropriate sanitization policies and
     procedures.  Binding contractual provisions to ensure the
     protection of the agency's information are often
     appropriate. 

  o  The agency's computer security training and awareness
     program can be an effective mechanism to address media
     disposal and sanitization issues.  Users require specific
     guidance and a source of answers to their questions.

  o  Does the agency lease equipment?  If so, leased equipment
     used to process sensitive information should not be returned
     to the vendor unless the media is sanitized.

Techniques for Media Sanitization
Three techniques are commonly used for media sanitization: 
overwriting, degaussing, and destruction.  Overwriting and
degaussing are the methods recommended for disposition of
sensitive automated information.  (Users of classified systems
may also have to be concerned with data remanence.  This refers
to the residual information left behind once media has been in
some way erased.)  Security officers should be consulted for
appropriate guidance.

Overwriting
Overwriting is an effective method of clearing data from magnetic
media.  As the name implies, overwriting utilizes a program to
write (1s, 0s, or a combination of both) onto the location of the
media where the file to be sanitized is located.  The number of
times that media is overwritten depends on the level of
sensitivity of the information.  Overwriting should not be
confused with merely deleting the pointer to a file, as discussed
above. 

Of course, in order for overwriting to be used, the media must be
in working order; for example, overwriting may not be used on a
disk which has suffered a head crash nor on a diskette which has
had coffee spilled on it.  Regular preventative maintenance can
help keep drives in working order to minimize head crashes.  Many
programs are available, particularly for PCs, that have an
overwrite function.  

Although overwriting can be used for clearing magnetic tapes,
this method is time-consuming and generally never used. 
Degaussing, as discussed below, is a better alternative. 

In the design of sensitive applications, software developers may
wish to consider integrating overwrite capability directly into
the application.  

Degaussing
Degaussing is a method to magnetically erase data from magnetic
media.  Two types of degaussers exist:  strong magnets and
electric degaussers.  Degaussers are tested by the Department of
Defense; those which meet their requirements are placed on the
Degausser Products List (DPL) of the National Security Agency's
(NSA) Information Systems Security Products and Services
Catalogue.

Different types of degaussing magnets are appropriate for varying
types of magnetic media; consult the NSA's A Guide to
Understanding Data Remanence in Automated Information Systems for
details.  Note that common magnets (e.g., those used to hang a
picture on a wall) are fairly weak and cannot effectively degauss
magnetic media. 

Destruction
The final method of sanitization is destruction of the media. 
NCSC-TG-025 provides specifics on this method and its
applicability.  Shredding diskettes, after removing the outer
protective casing, is also an option for unclassified media.

Employee Training and Awareness
Most employees who utilize IT systems also use, and in fact are
often the custodians of, magnetic media.  It is therefore
important for agencies to give the issue of media sanitization
appropriate attention in the agency computer security training
and awareness program.  

Employees should understand the following essential elements:

  o  Media containing sensitive information should not be
     released without appropriate sanitization.  

  o  File deletion functions (e.g., the DEL command on MS-DOS)
     usually can be expected to remove only the pointer to a file
     (i.e., the file is often still recoverable). 

  o  When data is removed from storage media, every precaution
     should be taken to remove duplicate versions that may exist
     on the same or other storage media, back-up files, temporary
     files, hidden files, or extended memory.

  o  Media in surplus equipment should be sanitized.

Data Remanence
A term which often arises during discussions of magnetic media
sanitization is "data remanence."  Data remanence is the residual
magnetic or electrical representation of data that has been in
some way erased or overwritten.  This residual information may
allow data to be reconstructed typically using laborious, time-
consuming methods.  This usually is a concern only to those
processing classified information.  For the unclassified
community, overwriting of media is usually sufficient to reduce
the threat of data reconstruction from data remanence.  Often
utility overwrite programs contain an option to overwrite the
location of the file three times, ensuring that the chance of
recovery of the information from data remanence is very remote. 

Disk Encryption
Another approach to solving the problems raised in this bulletin
is through the use of integrated encryption technology.  This
technology uses a device or software which encrypts all data as
it is written to the disk.  When the user retrieves a file, the
data is automatically decrypted for the owner to use.  This
encryption/decryption process is typically transparent to the
user.  Should the disk be lost or stolen, no useful data can be
retrieved without the legitimate owner's encryption key.  

Other Technologies 
While this CSL Bulletin focuses on the need for sanitization of
magnetic media, users should be aware that other storage
technologies (e.g., optical media, EEPROM, bubble memory, UVPROM)
may require special procedures.  Security officers should be
consulted when such issues arise.  

References
FIRMR Bulletin C-22, Security and Privacy Protection of Federal
Information Processing (FIP) Resources, September 18, 1992. 
Issued by the General Services Administration.

NBS Special Publication 500-101, Care and Handling of Computer
Magnetic Storage Media, June 1983.  A general guide to
preservation of data on storage media particularly magnetic tapes
and flexible disk cartridges.  Available from the National
Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161, as PB83-
237271.

NCSC-TG-025, A Guide to Understanding Data Remanence in Automated
Information Systems, Version 2, September 1991.  National
Security Agency, Ft. Meade, MD 20755-6000.

Degausser Products List of NSA's Information Systems Security
Products and Services Catalogue, issued quarterly by the National
Security Agency, Ft. Meade, MD 20755-6000. 

