PREPARING FOR CONTINGENCIES AND DISASTERS
A computer security contingency is an event with the potential to
disrupt computer operations, thereby disrupting critical mission
and business functions.  Such an event could be a power outage,
hardware failure, fire, or storm.  If the event is very
destructive, it is often called a disaster.  

To avert potential contingencies and disasters or minimize the
damage they cause, organizations can take steps early to control
the event.  Generally called contingency planning, this activity
is closely related to incident handling, which primarily
addresses malicious technical threats such as hackers and
viruses.

This bulletin summarizes a chapter on contingency planning in the
forthcoming NIST handbook on computer security.  References are
available in the handbook.

Contingency Planning
Contingency planning involves more than planning for a move
offsite after a disaster destroys a data center.  It also
addresses how to keep an organization's critical functions
operating in the event of disruptions, both large and small. 
This broader perspective on contingency planning is based on the
distribution of computer support throughout an organization.  The
contingency planning process involves the following steps:

  Identifying the mission- or business-critical functions,
  Identifying the resources that support the critical functions,
  Anticipating potential contingencies or disasters,
  Selecting contingency planning strategies,
  Implementing the contingency strategies, and
  Testing and revising the strategy.  

Identifying the Mission- or Business-Critical Functions
Protecting the continuity of an organization's mission or
business is very difficult if it is not clearly identified. 
Managers need to understand the organization from a point of view
that usually extends beyond the area they control.  The
definition of an organization's critical mission or business
functions is often called a business plan.

Since the development of a business plan will be used to support
contingency planning, it is necessary not only to identify
critical missions and businesses, but also to set priorities for
them.  A fully redundant capability for each function is
prohibitively expensive for most organizations.  In the event of
a disaster, certain functions will not be performed.  If
appropriate priorities have been set (and approved by senior
management), it could mean the difference in the organization's
ability to survive a disaster.  

Identifying the Resources That Support Critical Functions
After identifying critical missions and business functions, it is
necessary to identify the supporting resources, the time frames
in which each resource is used (e.g., is the resource needed
constantly or only at the end of the month?), and the effect on
the mission or business of the unavailability of the resource. 
In identifying resources, a traditional problem has been that
different managers oversee different resources.  They may not
realize how resources interact to support the organization's
mission or business.  Many of these resources are not computer
resources.  Contingency planning should address all the resources
needed to perform a function, regardless whether they directly
relate to a computer.   

The analysis of needed resources should be conducted by those who
understand how the function is performed and the dependencies of
various resources on other resources and other critical
relationships.  This will allow an organization to assign
priorities to resources since not all elements of all resources
are crucial to the critical functions.  

Human Resources
People are perhaps an organization's most obvious resource.  Some
functions require the effort of specific individuals, some
require specialized expertise, and some only require individuals
who can be trained to perform a specific task.  Within the
information technology field, human resources include both
operators (such as technicians or system programmers) and users
(such as data entry clerks or information analysts).

Processing Capability
Traditionally contingency planning has focused on processing
power (i.e., if the data center is down, how can applications
dependent on it continue to be processed?).  Although the need
for data center backup remains vital, today's other processing
alternatives are also important.  Local area networks (LANs),
minicomputers, workstations, and personal computers in all forms
of centralized and distributed processing may be performing
critical tasks.  

Automated Applications and Data 
Computer systems run applications that process data.  Without
current electronic versions of both applications and data,
computerized processing may not be possible.  If the processing
is being performed on alternate hardware, the applications must
be compatible with the alternate hardware, operating systems and
other software (including version and configuration), and
numerous other technical factors.  Because of the complexity, it
is normally necessary to periodically verify compatibility.  (See
Testing and Revising.)

Computer-Based Services
An organization uses many different kinds of computer-based
services to perform its functions.  The two most important are
normally communications services and information services. 
Communications can be further categorized as data and voice
communications; however, in many organizations these are managed
by the same service.  Information services include any source of
information outside of the organization.  Many of these sources
are becoming automated, including on-line government and private
databases, news services, and bulletin boards.  

Physical Infrastructure  
For people to work effectively, they need a safe working
environment and appropriate equipment and utilities.  This can
include office space, heating, cooling, venting, power, water,
sewage, other utilities, desks, telephones, fax machines,
personal computers, terminals, courier services, file cabinets,
and many other items.  In addition, computers also need space and
utilities, such as electricity.  Electronic and paper media used
to store applications and data also have physical requirements.

Documents and Papers
Many functions rely on vital records and various documents,
papers, or forms.  These records could be important because of a
legal need (such as being able to produce a signed copy of a
loan) or because they are the only record of the information. 
Records can be maintained on paper, microfiche, microfilm,
magnetic media, or optical disk.  

Anticipating Potential Contingencies or Disasters
Although it is impossible to think of all the things that can go
wrong, the next step is to identify a likely range of problems. 
The development of scenarios will help an organization develop a
plan to address the wide range of things that can go wrong.  

Scenarios should include small and large contingencies.  While
some general classes of contingency scenarios are obvious,
imagination and creativity, as well as research, can point to
other possible, but less obvious, contingencies.  The contingency
scenarios should address each of the resources described above. 
The following are examples of some of the types of questions that
contingency scenarios may address:

Human Resources:  Can people get to work?  Are key personnel
willing to cross a picket line?  Are there critical skills and
knowledge possessed by one person?  Can people easily get to an
alternative site?

Processing Capability:  Are the computers harmed?  What happens
if some of the computers are inoperable, but not all?

Automated Applications and Data:  Has data integrity been
affected?  Is an application sabotaged?  Can an application run
on a different processing platform?

Computer-Based Services:  Can the computers communicate?  To
where?  Can people communicate?  Are information services down? 
For how long?

Infrastructure:  Do people have a place to sit?  Do they have
equipment to do their jobs?  Can they occupy the building?  

Documents/Paper:  Can needed records be found?  Are they
readable?

Selecting Contingency Planning Strategies
The next step is to plan how to recover needed resources.  In
evaluating alternatives, it is necessary to consider what
controls are in place to prevent and minimize contingencies. 
Since no set of controls can cost-effectively prevent all
contingencies, it is necessary to coordinate prevention and
recovery efforts.  

A contingency planning strategy normally consists of three parts:
emergency response, recovery, and resumption.  Emergency response
encompasses the initial actions taken to protect lives and limit
damage.  Recovery refers to the steps that are taken to continue
support for critical functions.  Resumption is the return to
normal operations.  The relationship between recovery and
resumption is important.  The longer it takes to resume normal
operations, the longer the organization will have to operate in
the recovery mode.  

The selection of a strategy needs to be based on practical
considerations, including feasibility and cost.  The different
categories of resources should each be considered.  Risk
assessment can be used to help estimate the cost of options to
decide on an optimal strategy.  For example, is it more expensive
to purchase and maintain a generator or to move processing to an
alternate site, considering the likelihood of losing electrical
power for various lengths of time?  Are the consequences of a
loss of computer-related resources sufficiently high to warrant
the cost of various recovery strategies?  The risk assessment
should focus on areas where it is not clear which strategy is the
best.  

In developing contingency planning strategies, there are many
factors to consider in addressing each of the resources that
support critical functions.  

Human Resources
To ensure an organization has access to workers with the right
skills and knowledge, training and documentation of knowledge are
needed.  During a major contingency, people will be under
significant stress and may panic.  If the contingency is a
regional disaster, their first concerns will probably be their
family and property.  In addition, many people will be either
unwilling or unable to come to work.  Additional hiring or
temporary services can be used.  The use of additional personnel
may introduce security vulnerabilities.  

Contingency planning, especially for emergency response, normally
places the highest emphasis on the protection of human life.  

Processing Capability
Strategies for processing capability are normally grouped into
five categories:  hot site; cold site; redundancy; reciprocal
agreements; and hybrids.  These terms originated with recovery
strategies for data centers but can be applied to other
platforms.  

  Hot site - A building already equipped with processing
capability and other services.  

  Cold site - A building for housing processors that can be
easily adapted for use.  

  Redundant site - A site equipped and configured exactly like
the primary site.  (Some organizations plan on having reduced
processing capability after a disaster and use partial
redundancy.  The stocking of spare personal computers or LAN
servers also provides some redundancy.)  

  Reciprocal agreement - An agreement that allows two
organizations to back each other up.  (While this approach often
sounds desirable, contingency planning experts note that this
alternative has the greatest chance of failure due to problems
keeping agreements and plans up-to-date as systems and personnel
change.)  

  Hybrids - Any combinations of the above such as using having a
hot site as a backup in case a redundant or reciprocal agreement
site is damaged by a separate contingency.

Recovery may include several stages, perhaps marked by increasing
availability of processing capability.  Resumption planning may
include contracts or the ability to place contracts to replace
equipment.

Automated Applications and Data
Normally, the primary contingency strategy for applications and
data is regular backup and secure offsite storage.  Important
decisions to be addressed include how often the backup is
performed, how often it is stored off-site, and how it is
transported (to storage, to an alternate processing site, or to
support the resumption of normal operations).

Computer-Based Services
Service providers may offer contingency services.  Voice
communications carriers often can reroute calls (transparently to
the user) to a new location.  Data communications carriers can
also reroute traffic.  Hot sites are usually capable of receiving
data and voice communications.  If one service provider is down,
it may be possible to use another.  However, the type of
communications carrier lost, either local or long distance, is
important.  Local voice service may be carried on cellular. 
Local data communications, especially for large volumes, is
normally more difficult.  In addition, resuming normal operations
may require another rerouting of communications services.

Physical Infrastructure
Hot sites and cold sites may also offer office space in addition
to processing capability support.  Other types of contractual
arrangements can be made for office space, security services,
furniture, and more in the event of a contingency.  If the
contingency plan calls for moving offsite, procedures need to be
developed to ensure a smooth transition back to the primary
operating facility or to a new facility.  Protection of the
physical infrastructure is normally an important part of the
emergency response plan, such as use of fire extinguishers or
protecting equipment from water damage.

Documents and Papers
The primary contingency strategy is usually backup onto magnetic,
optical, microfiche, paper, or other medium and offsite storage. 
Paper documents are generally harder to backup than electronic
ones.  A supply of forms and other needed papers can be stored
offsite.  

Implementing the Contingency Strategies
Once the contingency planning strategies have been selected, it
is necessary to make appropriate preparations, document the
strategies, and train employees.  Many of these tasks are
ongoing.

Much preparation is needed to implement the strategies for
protecting critical functions and their supporting resources. 
For example, one common preparation is to establish procedures
for backing up files and applications.  Another is to establish
contracts and agreements, if the contingency strategy calls for
them.  Existing service contracts may need to be renegotiated to
add contingency services.  Another preparation may be to purchase
equipment, especially to support a redundant capability.

It is important to keep preparations, including documentation,
up-to-date.  Computer systems change rapidly and so should backup
services and redundant equipment.  Contracts and agreements may
also need to reflect the changes.  If additional equipment is
needed, it must be maintained and periodically replaced when it
is no longer dependable or no longer fits the organization's
architecture.  

Preparation should also include formally designating people who
are responsible for various tasks in the event of a contingency. 
These people are often referred to as the contingency response
team.  This team is often composed of people who were a part of
the contingency planning team.

There are many important implementation issues for an
organization.  Two of the most important are how many plans
should be developed and who prepares each plan.  Both of these
questions revolve around the organization's overall strategy for
contingency planning.  The answers should be documented in
organization policy and procedures.

How Many Plans?
Some organizations have just one plan for the entire
organization, and others have a plan for every distinct computer
system, application, or other resource.  Other approaches
recommend a plan for each business or mission function, with
separate plans, as needed, for critical resources.  

The answer to the question, therefore, depends upon the unique
circumstances for each organization.  But it is critical to
coordinate between resource managers and functional managers who
are responsible for the mission or business.

Who Prepares the Plan?
If an organization decides on a centralized approach to
contingency planning, it may be best to name a contingency
planning coordinator.  The coordinator prepares the plans in
cooperation with various functional and resource managers.  Some
organizations place responsibility directly with the functional
and resource managers.

Documenting
The contingency plan needs to be written, kept up-to-date as the
system and other factors change, and stored in a safe place.  A
written plan is critical during a contingency, especially if the
person who developed the plan is unavailable.  It should clearly
state in simple language the sequence of tasks to be performed in
the event of a contingency so that someone with minimal knowledge
could immediately begin to execute the plan.  It is generally
helpful to store up-to-date copies of the contingency plan in
several locations, including any off-site locations, such as
alternate processing sites or backup data storage facilities.

Training
All personnel should be trained in their contingency-related
duties.  New personnel should be trained as they join the
organization, refresher training may be needed, and personnel
will need to practice their skills.

Training is particularly important for effective employee
response during emergencies.  There is no time to check a manual
to determine correct procedures if there is a fire.  Depending on
the nature of the emergency, there may or may not be time to
protect equipment and other assets.  Practice is necessary in
order to react correctly, especially when human safety is
involved.  

Testing and Revising 
A contingency plan should be tested periodically because there
will undoubtedly be flaws in the plan and in its implementation. 
The plan will become dated as time passes and as the resources
used to support critical functions change.  Responsibility for
keeping the contingency plan current should be specifically
assigned.  The extent and frequency of testing will vary between
organizations and among systems.  There are several types of
testing, including reviews, analyses, and simulations of
disasters.  

A review can be a simple test to check the accuracy of
contingency plan documentation.  For instance, a reviewer could
check if individuals listed are still in the organization and
still have the responsibilities that caused them to be included
in the plan.  This test can check home and work telephone
numbers, organizational codes, and building and room numbers. 
The review can determine if files can be restored from backup
tapes or if employees know emergency procedures.

An analysis may be performed on the entire plan or portions of
it, such as emergency response procedures.  It is beneficial if
the analysis is performed by someone who did not help develop the
contingency plan but has a good working knowledge of the critical
function and supporting resources.  The analyst(s) may mentally
follow the strategies in the contingency plan, looking for flaws
in the logic or process used by the plan's developers.  The
analyst may also interview functional managers, resource
managers, and their staff to uncover missing or unworkable pieces
of the plan.

Organizations may also arrange disaster simulations.  These tests
provide valuable information about flaws in the contingency plan
and provide practice for a real emergency.  While they can be
expensive, these tests can also provide critical information that
can be used to ensure the continuity of important functions.  In
general, the more critical the functions and the resources
addressed in the contingency plan, the more cost-beneficial it is
to perform a disaster simulation.