 [Apologies for multiple copies of this announcement]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------


                        SECOND CALL FOR PAPERS

                               DIMVA 2005

                   Second GI SIG SIDAR Conference on
     Detection of Intrusions & Malware, and Vulnerability Assessment
    In Cooperation with the IEEE Task Force on Information Assurance

                            Vienna, Austria
                           July 7 - 8, 2005

                     http://www.dimva.org/dimva2005
                         mailto:info@dimva.org

----------------------------------------------------------------------------



The special interest group Security - Intrusion Detection and Response
(SIDAR) of the German Informatics Society (GI) organizes DIMVA as an
annual conference that brings together experts from throughout Europe
to discuss the state of the art in the areas of intrusion detection,
detection of malware, and assessment of vulnerabilities. DIMVA
emphasizes the collaboration and exchange of ideas between industry,
academia, law enforcement and government, and invites four types of
submissions:

- Full papers of up to 6000 words, presenting novel and mature research
  results. Full papers will be reviewed, and papers accepted for
  presentation at the conference will be included in the proceedings,
  which are planned to appear in Springer’s Lecture Notes in Computer
  Science (LNCS) series.

- Industry papers of up to 2000 words, describing best practices,
  case studies, lessons learned, or latest product developments.
  Industry papers will be reviewed and, if accepted for presentation
  at the conference, will be published at the DIMVA 2005 Web site.

- Panel proposals for the discussion of hot topics in the areas of
  intrusion detection, malware, or vulnerability assessment. Panel
  proposals should include a short rationale for the panel, a
  description of the proposed panel format, and names of panelists.

- Proposals of two-to-three-hour tutorials on topics of current or
  emerging interest. Tutorial proposals must not exceed three pages.
  They must clearly identify the intended audience, include a brief
  biography of the speaker, and contain enough material to provide
  a sense of their scope and depth. Tutorial material will be
  published on the DIMVA 2005 Web site.

The scope of DIMVA is broad and includes, but is not restricted to
the following areas:

Intrusion detection:
- Novel intrusion detection and correlation techniques such as alert
  fusion or honey pots
- Intrusion detection in special environments such as control systems
  or mobile networks
- Assessment, testing, and benchmarking of intrusion detection systems
- Automated response systems and intrusion prevention systems
- Incident management and response, response team cooperation, and
  legal issues

Malware:
- Detection and prevention of viruses, worms, Trojan horses, and
  other forms of malware
- Malware trends and statistics
- Techniques used to increase the harmfulness of malware
- Detailed analysis and discussion of the latest malware as well as
  computer and network forensics in general

Vulnerability assessment:
- New reverse engineering techniques
- Circumvention of security mechanisms such as bypassing of buffer
  overflow protection
- Risk evaluation and weighing, ROI on vulnerability assessments and
  management
- Software development, testing, and verification methodologies for
  IT-security

DIMVA specifically encourages interdisciplinary papers that combine
elements from all three main areas, as well as papers from other
communities such as machine learning, law, crime detection and
investigation, or economics that present these communities’
perspectives on and contributions to the above IT security issues.


ORGANIZING COMMITTEE:
General Chair : Christopher Kruegel (Technical University Vienna,
                Austria, chris@cs.ucsb.edu)
Academic Chair: Klaus Julisch (IBM Research, Switzerland,
                dimva-chair@zurich.ibm.com)
Industry Chair: Marc Heuse (n.runs, Germany, marc.heuse@nruns.com)
Sponsor Chair : Werner Metterhausen (VZM GmbH, Germany, wme@vzm.de)


PROGRAM COMMITTEE:
Dominique Alessandri, IBM, Switzerland
Thomas Biege, SUSE LINUX AG, Germany
Roland Büschkes, T-Mobile, Germany
Marc Dacier, Institut Eurécom, France
Herve Debar, France Telecom R&D, France
Luca Deri, ntop.org, Italy
Sven Dietrich, CMU, USA
Toralv Dirro, McAfee, Germany
Ulrich Flegel, University of Dortmund, Germany
Steven Furnell, University of Plymouth, UK
Detlef Günther, CERT-VW, Germany
Dirk Häger, BSI, Germany
Bernhard Hämmerli, HTA Luzern, Switzerland
Oliver Heinz, arago AG, Germany
Peter Herrmann, University of Dortmund, Germany
Marc Heuse, n.runs, Germany
Erland Jonsson, Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
Engin Kirda, Technical University Vienna, Austria
Hartmut König, Technical University of Cottbus, Germany
Klaus-Peter Kossakowski, Presecure, Germany
Hannes Lubich, Computer Associates, Switzerland
Michael Meier, Technical University of Cottbus, Germany
Martin Naedele, ABB Corporate Research, Switzerland
Marc Rennhard, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Dirk Schadt, Computer Associates, Germany
Robin Sommer, TU München, Germany
Axel Tanner, IBM Research, Switzerland
Stephen Wolthusen, Fraunhofer-IGD, Germany


IMPORTANT DATES:
- January 21, 2005: Deadline for submission of full and industry
  papers.
- March 4, 2005 : Deadline for submission of panel and tutorial
  proposals.
- March 21, 2005 : Notification of acceptance or rejection.
- April 8, 2005 : Final paper camera ready copy due.
- July 7 - 8, 2005: DIMVA conference.


PAPER SUBMISSIONS AND CONFERENCE REGISTRATION:
Submitted full papers must not substantially overlap papers that have
been published or that are simultaneously submitted to a journal or a
conference with proceedings. Full papers must include an abstract, a
list of keywords, and a list of all authors and their affiliations.
Committee members are not required to read appendices; thus, papers
should be intelligible without them.

Submissions must be in English, and in either postscript or PDF format.
Authors of accepted papers must guarantee that their papers will be
presented at the conference. Plan to give presentations, panels, and
tutorials in English.

Authors are invited to submit their papers electronically. Details on
the electronic submission procedure as well as detailed registration
information (including fees, suggested hotels, and travel directions)
will be provided by end of December 2004 at the conference Web site at
http://www.dimva.org/dimva2005.


SPONSORSHIP OPPORTUNITIES:
We solicit interested organizations to serve as sponsors for DIMVA
2005; please contact the Sponsor Chair, Mr. Werner Metterhausen, for
information regarding corporate sponsorship (mailto: wme@vzm.de).


STEERING COMMITTEE:
Chairs: Ulrich Flegel (University of Dortmund, Germany),
        Michael Meier (Technical University of Cottbus, Germany)
        Roland Büschkes (T-Mobile, Germany),
        Marc Heuse (n.runs, Germany)

