



                           U. S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE




                          INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY

                                      MANUAL












                             CHAPTER 10, ATTACHMENT 1
                    INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK



                         INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY 
                                   INTRODUCTION


Information technology is essential for accomplishing government
programs in today's world.  Managers and employees at all levels
require timely access to reliable information processing for routine
operations and major decisions.  Such availability and reliability is
based on the integrity and protection of the information systems.

The "Computer Security Act of 1987," Public Law 100-235 and
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130 require all
federal agencies to plan for the security of all sensitive IT systems
throughout their life cycle. OMB Circular A-130 also established a
minimum set of controls to be included in federal Information
Technology (IT) security programs.  The program must include the
implementation of policies, standards, and procedures which are
consistent with government-wide laws and  regulations, to assure an
adequate level of protection for IT systems whether maintained in-
house or commercially.  The circular directs agencies to assure:

1.    that IT systems operate effectively and accurately;

2.    that there are appropriate technical, personnel, administrative,
      physical, environmental, and telecommunications safeguards in
      IT systems; and

3.    that the continuity of the operations of IT systems that support
      critical agency functions is preserved.

The Department of Commerce (DOC) complies fully with all federal
statutes and directives on IT security and provides protection
commensurate with the sensitivity of the system or data processed. 
The Department has established and implemented an IT security
program which will provide reasonable and acceptable assurance
that sensitive and classified national security IT systems are
performing exactly as specified and doing nothing more; that
sensitive and classified information is provided adequate protection;
that data and software integrity is maintained; and, that unplanned
disruptions of processing will not seriously impact mission
accomplishment.

People, hardware, software, telecommunications, facilities and data
together form an IT system that is highly effective and productive. 
However, all IT systems involve certain risks that must be addressed
adequately through proper controls.  The policies contained in the
Departmental Administrative Order 212-2, "DOC IT  Management
Handbook," Chapter 10, IT Security, represent management's
commitment to assuring confidentiality, integrity, availability and
control of the Department's IT resources.

This "DOC IT Security Manual," is Attachment 1 to Chapter 10 of
the "DOC IT Management Handbook."  It combines all policies,
procedures, current detailed guidance and methodologies for
accomplishing the Department's IT security program.  This
document is divided into sections which discuss the requirements of
the Department's IT security program for specific subjects.  It is
intended to provide individuals assigned IT security responsibilities
and system owners with a more detailed single-source reference
document, which will be up-dated as new policies, procedures,
techniques, methodologies or program requirements are developed
and issued.

Relationship to Other Security Programs

The Office of Security is responsible for: (1) physical security of
facilities and equipment external to computers or telecommunication
lines; (2) all procedural matters relating to national security
information; (3) matters relating to background and security
clearance investigations of personnel; and (4) national emergency
planning.  For policies relating to these areas, refer to the
appropriate Departmental directives, i.e., DAO 207- series.

The Office of the Inspector General provides independent oversight
through audit and evaluation of the Department's IT security
program in accordance with the "Inspector General's Act of 1978." 
For policies relating to these areas, refer to the appropriate
Departmental directives, i.e., DAO 207-10.
                                     SECTION 1
                               PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS

A.    Purpose:

      This section describes the Department of Commerce (DOC)
      Information Technology (IT) Security program that complies
      fully with all federal laws, regulations and directives and
      communicates uniform policies for the protection and control
      of IT resources directly or indirectly relating to the activities of
      the Department.   

      This section also describes the policies and responsibilities for
      the establishment, implementation, maintenance and oversight
      of the IT security program within the Department, for the
      protection and control of vital DOC IT resources.  Basic
      elements of the Department's IT security program requirements
      will be identified in relation to assigned responsibilities. 

B.    Overview:

      Security of IT systems, as described in OMB Circular A-130,
      requires the protection of automated systems and information
      while associated with any automated processing activity, and
      the assurance that the systems do exactly what they are
      supposed to do and nothing more.  IT security requires
      management controls to ensure authorized access to the
      information in the systems and proper handling of input,
      processing, and output.  

      The implementation of an effective IT security program within
      the Department begins with the establishment of the
      organizational IT security structure and the assignment of
      broad responsibilities.

      Individuals appointed to positions with IT security
      responsibilities are accountable for compliance with all DOC or
      federal laws, regulations and policies related to the assigned
      responsibilities.

C.    Background and Authority:

      The DOC IT Security Program is established in compliance
      with the "Computer Security Act of 1987," Public Law 100-235,
      OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, "Security of Federal
      Automated Information Systems," National Security Directive
      (NSD) 42, "National Policy for the Security of National Security
      Telecommunications and Information Systems" and
      Departmental Organizational Order DOO 20-14. 




D.    Scope:

      The policies contained in this document are applicable to all
      DOC IT resources at all levels of sensitivity, whether
      maintained in-house or commercially.  These policies are
      mandatory on all organizational units, employees, contractors,
      and others having access to and/or using the IT resources of the
      Department.

      These policies apply to all automated technology currently in
      existence and to any new automated technology acquired after
      the effective date of this policy document.

      The IT security program focuses on assuring confidentiality,
      integrity and availability of all IT resources necessary for
      processing or transmitting the information.  The IT security
      program consists of a number of different elements, including
      some that would normally come under other security programs. 
      Those elements that are required by the "Computer Security
      Act of 1987" or OMB Circular A-130 are considered part of
      the DOC IT security program and are included in this IT
      Security Manual.

E.    Policy:

      The policies stated in the "IT Management Handbook" require
      that all DOC organizations establish, implement and maintain
      an IT security program consistent with the Department and
      government-wide laws, regulations, policies, procedures and
      standards.  The program must include as a minimum, adequate
      and appropriate levels of protection for all IT resources within
      the organization, including hardware, software, physical and
      environmental facilities, telecommunications, administrative,
      personnel and data.  

      All IT systems will be identified and appropriate controls
      implemented in the following categories:

      1.     Management controls;

      2.     Acquisition/development/installation/implementation
             controls;

      3.     Operational controls;

      4.     IT security awareness and training; and

      5.     Technical controls.

      Guidance for each of these categories of controls are included
      in later sections of this document.

      Responsibilities for the DOC IT security program starts at the
      Department level and flows down through management of all
      organizations to the individual users.

      1.     The DOC Office for Information Resources Management
             is responsible for security of DOC IT resources.  Non-IT
             security programs (e.g., theft of computer resources,
             physical security, personnel security, safeguarding
             classified material and Inspector General requirements are
             stated in Section G. below.

      2.     The head of each operating unit is responsible for
             adequate protection of the operating unit IT resources. 
             Staff responsibility for IT security shall be monitored by
             the operating unit Senior Official for Information
             Resources Management.

      3.     System owners are responsible for providing adequate and
             appropriate levels of protection for the IT resources under
             their control to prevent  unauthorized disclosure, effective
             and accurate processing and continuity of operations for
             accomplishment of the organization's mission.

      4.     Each employee of the Department is responsible for the
             adequate protection of IT resources within their control or
             possession.

      IT security program responsibilities are assigned to the
      Department and all operating units in line with the
      requirements outlined in section F. below.

F.    Responsibilities and Process:
       
      Department Level

      The Director for Information Resources Management (IRM) is
      responsible for information while being processed and/or
      transmitted electronically, and for the security of the resources
      associated with these functions.  The Director for IRM is the
      Designated Approving Authority (DAA) for all IT systems
      processing classified national security information within the
      Department.  This authority cannot be delegated.  The Director
      for IRM will monitor, evaluate and report, as required, to the
      Assistant Secretary for Administration on the status of IT
      security within the Department and the adequacy of operating
      unit IT Security programs.  Within IRM, the authority to
      perform these responsibilities, except DAA for classified
      systems, will be exercised by the Departmental IT Security
      Manager.

      The DOC IT Security Manager monitors, evaluates and reports,
      as required, to the Director for IRM on the status of IT
      security within the Department and the adequacy of the
      programs administered by the operating units.  The DOC IT
      Security Manager will:

      1.     Develop policies, procedures and guidance establishing,
             implementing, maintaining and overseeing requirements
             for the Department's IT security program to be followed
             by all DOC organizations.

      2.     Provide guidance and technical assistance to operating
             units, including analyzing, evaluating and approving all IT
             system security plans and requirements for IT systems
             security.

      3.     Assure DOC IT security oversight through compliance
             reviews of operating units and organizations and IT
             security verification reviews of individual systems and
             participating in Commerce program management
             oversight processes.

      4.     Maintain a tracking system and records concerning
             implementation of the required controls and accreditation
             status of all DOC IT systems.

      5.     Establish an IT Security Coordinating Committee and
             chair regularly scheduled meetings to discuss and
             disseminate information on IT security matters and
             concerns.

      6.     Coordinate the review of all controls for classified IT
             systems by the Office of Security and the
             Telecommunications Management Division and evaluate
             the adequacy of all technical controls for accreditation.  

      7.     Act as the central point of contact for the Department for
             IT security related incidents or violations.  Investigate or
             cause to be investigated any incidents or violations,
             maintain records and prepare reports, disseminate
             information concerning potential threats and report to the
             Office of Security any violations that come under their
             area of responsibilities or to the Assistant Inspector
             General for Investigations any activity which may
             constitute a violation of law or otherwise is reportable to
             that office in accordance with DAO 207-10, "Inspector
             General Investigations."

      8.     Coordinate with the Department's Office of Security on
             security matters of mutual interest.

      Operating Unit Level

      Senior IRM Official - Each operating unit Senior IRM Official
      shall conduct an IT security program that ensures appropriate
      and adequate levels of protection for all IT systems within the
      operating unit.  The Senior IRM official shall:

      1.     Be the DAA for all sensitive systems within their
             organization.  This approval authority may only be
             delegated to a senior management official of a subordinate
             organizational unit, if that official does not have direct
             control over the IT system being accredited.  Delegation
             of accreditation authority must be requested and approved
             in advance by the DOC Director for IRM.

      2.     Assure ownership is assigned for all IT resources within
             the operating unit (i.e., hardware, software, data,
             telecommunications, etc.)
 
      3.     Appoint an IT Security Officer (ITSO) and alternate for
             the operating unit.  This individual, or alternate, should
             have the staff responsibility for the operating unit IT
             Security program.  

      Operating Unit ITSO - The operating unit ITSO shall serve as
      the central point of contact for the operating unit IT security
      program with the Departmental IT Security Manager.  The
      operating unit ITSO shall perform the following functions:

      1.     Represent the operating unit as a voting member of the
             DOC IT Security Coordinating Committee, attend
             regularly scheduled meetings to obtain current
             information on issues relating to federal or DOC IT
             security policies, regulations, guidelines, share information
             with the committee about issues or concerns and
             participate in special subcommittees working to solve
             Department-wide issues.

      2.     Ensure that an ITSO and alternate are appointed for each
             major subordinate organizational component within the
             operating unit, if appropriate.  These individuals will serve
             as the point of contact for their organizational component
             IT security program with the operating unit ITSO.

      3.     Establish and maintain a list of all IT systems within the
             operating unit and provide an up-to-date list to the DOC
             IT Security Manager annually.

      4.     Ensure that an IT System Security Officer (ITSSO) has
             been appointed for each IT system within the operating
             unit.

      5.     Ensure IT security plans are prepared in the proper
             format for all sensitive and classified IT systems owned
             and operated by the operating unit.  Review and comment
             on individual IT security plans, ensuring that all
             corrective actions are completed and submit all plans to
             the DOC IT Security Manager.  Requirements for IT
             security plans are contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.2 of
             the "DOC IT Management Handbook" and Section 2 of
             the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      6.     Ensure that risk analysis is completed for all sensitive or
             classified IT systems within the operating unit. 
             Requirements for risk analysis are contained in Chapter
             10, Section 10.7 of the "DOC IT Management Handbook"
             and Section 7 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      7.     Ensure that contingency and disaster recovery plans are
             developed for all sensitive or classified IT systems within
             the operating unit.  Requirements for contingency and
             disaster recovery planning are contained in Chapter 10,
             Section 10.8 of the "DOC IT Management Handbook"
             and Section 8 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      8.     Maintain a tracking system concerning implementation of
             the required controls and accreditation status for all
             operating unit sensitive and classified IT systems.

      9.     Act as the central point of contact for accreditation of all
             sensitive IT systems within the operating unit.  Ensure
             that all certification requirements have been met for each
             system, prior to accreditation.  Certification requirements
             are contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.3 of the "DOC IT
             Management Handbook" and Section 3 of the "DOC IT
             Security Manual." The ITSO will submit an accreditation
             status report quarterly to the DOC IT Security Manager. 
             Accreditation requirements are contained in Chapter 10,
             Section 10.4 of the "DOC IT Management Handbook"
             and Section 4 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      10.    Conduct, or cause to be conducted, IT security verification
             reviews of all operating unit sensitive IT systems every
             three years.  Requirements for IT security verification
             reviews are contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.5 of the
             "DOC IT Management Handbook" and Section 5 of the
             "DOC IT Security Manual."

      11.    Ensure that all operating unit personnel are provided
             appropriate IT security awareness and training.  IT
             security awareness and training requirements are
             contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.17 of the "DOC IT
             Management Handbook" and Section 17 of the "DOC IT
             Security Manual."

      12.    Act as the central point of contact for the operating unit
             for any type of IT security related incidents or violations. 
             Investigate or cause to be investigated any incidents or
             violations, maintain records and ensure  reports are
             submitted to the DOC IT Security Manager and
             disseminate information concerning potential threats to
             system owners.  Requirements for incident and violation
             reporting are contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.6 of the
             "DOC IT Management Handbook" and Section 6 of the
             "DOC IT Security Manual." 

      13.    Ensure that the operating unit has a malicious software
             policy in place and the required virus detection and
             elimination software and procedures are available to
             protect against these threats.  Malicious software
             protection and reporting requirements are contained in
             Chapter 10, Section 10.6.1 of the "DOC IT Management
             Handbook" and Section 6.1 of the "DOC IT Security
             Manual."

      14.    Ensure that the operating unit has established a policy
             against the illegal duplication of Copyrighted software. 
             Ensure that all systems are audited for illegal software at
             least annually and inventories of all software on each
             individual system is maintained to verify that only legal
             copies of software are being used.  Requirements for
             software copyright protection, auditing and reporting are
             contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.12.1 of the "DOC IT
             Management Handbook" and Section 10.12.1 of the "DOC
             IT Security Manual."

      15.    Coordinate with the operating unit Security Office on
             security matters of mutual interest.
  
      In the absence of the ITSO the alternate shall perform all
      functions normally assigned to the ITSO for the operating unit
      IT security program.

      Subordinate Organization ITSO - Not all operating units within
      the Department will require this level position.  A major
      subordinate organization is defined to mean any large
      organizational component that has management responsibility
      for a number of individual IT systems performing separate
      functions (i.e., Line Office, Laboratory, Regional Office.)  The
      subordinate organization ITSO shall serve as the central point
      of contact for the subordinate organization IT security program
      with the operating unit ITSO.  If this level of position is
      determined to be appropriate for the operating unit, the
      functions of the ITSO for the subordinate organization will
      generally parallel those specified for the ITSO. 

      System Owner - Responsibility for the protection of IT
      resources generally falls into two broad categories: custodial
      and owner.  The fulfillment of the protection responsibilities of
      each is mandatory.

      1.     All information resources (hardware, software, facilities,
             data and telecommunications) will be assigned to an owner
             designated in writing, to the Senior IRM Official of the
             operating unit.  For example, the "owner" of the
             resources contained within a general support system may
             be the manager of that facility.  Resources located within
             user areas (i.e., offices or laboratories) may be "owned"
             by the manager of those areas.  To assist with the
             determination of ownership, individual system boundaries
             must be established.  A system is identified by logical
             boundaries being drawn around the various processing,
             communications, storage and related resources.  They
             must be under the same direct management control with
             essentially the same function, reside in the same
             environment and have the same characteristics and
             security needs.  Each system will be designated either a
             general support system or an application system.  Chapter
             10, Section 10.2 of the "DOC IT Management Handbook"
             and Section 2 of the "DOC IT Security Manual" contain
             definitions for general support and application systems.

      2.     Ownership of information and/or information processing
             resources may be assigned to an organization, subordinate
             functional element, a position , or a specific individual. 
             When ownership is assigned to an organizational or
             functional element, the head of the unit so designated shall
             be considered the resource owner.  Some, but not
             necessarily all factors to be considered in the
             determination of ownership are: 

             (a)   The originator or creator of data.

             (b)   The organization or individual with the greatest
                   functional interest.

             (c)   Physical possession of the resource.

      3.     General support system owners are suppliers of data
             processing services frequently for applications owned by
             other organizations.  Typically these systems are
             custodians of software, data, input and output produced
             by the data processing facility to support one or more
             application owners.  Custodial responsibility includes the
             obligation to comply with applicable security policies and
             directives, and to administer application owner specified
             controls and safeguards for the data and programs of
             those owners.  Many of the Department's local area
             networks will fit into this category.

      4.     Each system owner shall be responsible to:

             (a)   Determine the sensitivity of the resources for which
                   responsible.

             (b)   Determine the appropriate level of security required
                   which is consistent with federal and DOC laws
                   regulations and directives and protection
                   requirements of the system for confidentiality,
                   integrity or available and ensure that an adequate
                   level of protection is maintained.

             (c)   Be the certifying official and complete all required
                   certification actions, issue a certification statement
                   and prepare an accreditation package which will be
                   forwarded to the DAA for formal accreditation of
                   the system, every three years or when major changes
                   occur to the system, whichever is less.  If the
                   certifying official is at a higher level in the
                   organization, the system owner will complete all
                   required certification actions and forward the
                   accreditation package to the certifying official, who
                   will issue the certification statement. Chapter 10,
                   Section 10.3 of the "DOC IT Management
                   Handbook" and Section 3 of the "DOC IT Security
                   Manual" contain certification requirements.

             (d)   Monitor compliance, and periodically re-evaluate
                   previously specified levels of sensitivity and
                   protection.

             (e)   Ensure that all systems are audited for illegal
                   software at least annually and inventories of all
                   software on each individual system is maintained to
                   verify that only legal copies of software are being
                   used.  Requirements for software copyright
                   protection, auditing and reporting are contained in
                   Chapter 10, Section 10.12.1 of the "DOC IT
                   Management Handbook" and Section 10.12.1 of the
                   "DOC IT Security Manual."

             (e)   Ensure that each ADP position (including contract
                   positions) are properly designated in accordance with
                   position sensitivity criteria and receive appropriate
                   investigative processing.  Refer to Chapter 10,
                   Section 10.9 of the "DOC IT Management
                   Handbook, Section 9 of the "DOC IT Security
                   Manual" and the "DOC Personnel Security Manual"
                   for further guidance.

             (g)   Appoint an individual to serve as the IT System
                   Security Officer (ITSSO) with responsibility to
                   develop, implement and manage the security of the
                   system.

      ITSSO - The ITSSO for each classified or sensitive system shall
      perform the following functions:

      1.     Advise the IT system owner on matters pertaining to IT
             systems security.

      2.     Develop, implement and manage the execution of the IT
             system security program.

      3.     Prepare, or cause to be prepared an IT system security
             plan in the proper format for the IT system. 
             Requirements for IT security plans are contained in
             Chapter 10, Section 10.2 of the "DOC IT Management
             Handbook" and Section 2 of the "DOC IT Security
             Manual."

      4.     Conduct, or cause to be conducted, a risk analysis on the
             system when there are major changes to the system or
             every three years, whichever is less.  Requirements for
             risk analysis are contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.7 of
             the "DOC IT Management Handbook" and Section 7 of
             the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      5.     Ensure that contingency and disaster recovery plans are
             developed, maintained in an up-to-date condition and
             tested at least annually.  Requirements for contingency
             and disaster recovery plans are contained in Chapter 10,
             Section 10.8 of the "DOC IT Management Handbook"
             and Section 8 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      6.     Establish and maintain liaison with any remote facilities
             or users served by the IT system, the operating unit ITSO,
             or if appropriate, the subordinate organization ITSO.

      7.     Monitor changes in hardware, software,
             telecommunications, facilities and user requirements to
             ensure that security is not compromised or degraded.

      8.     Exercise system responsibility or direct activities for
             password management and control.

      9.     Arrange for IT security awareness training for the system
             staff and monitor the user training programs to ensure
             that personnel receive security orientation before being
             allowed access to sensitive IT resources.

      10.    Ensure that positions requiring access to classified
             information or resources are identified and that
             incumbents of these positions receive an appropriate level
             of security clearance before access is granted.

      11.    Investigate known or suspected security incidents or
             violations and prepare reports of findings as required in
             Chapter 10, Section 10.6 of the "DOC IT Management
             Handbook" and Section 6 of the "DOC IT Security
             Manual.  Verbal and written reports will be made to the
             operating unit ITSO through the subordinate ITSO, if
             appropriate.  Incidents involving a physical security
             violation, such as theft or violations of the personnel
             security, classified information or industrial security
             programs will be referred to the operating unit Office of
             Security for investigation.

      12.    Ensure that the organization abides by the DOC and
             operating unit malicious software policies and has the
             required virus detection and elimination software and
             procedures available to protect against these threats. 
             Malicious software protection and reporting requirements
             are contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.6.1 of the "DOC
             IT Management Handbook" and Section 6.1 of the "DOC
             IT Security Manual."

      13.    Audit all the systems within the organization for illegal
             software at least annually and maintain inventories of all
             software on each individual system to verify that only
             legal copies of software are being used.  Requirements for
             software copyright protection, auditing and reporting are
             contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.12.1 of the "DOC IT
             Management Handbook" and Section 12.1 of the "DOC
             IT Security Manual."

      14.    Review IT related procurement specifications for
             hardware, software or services to ensure that they include
             adequate security requirements and/or specifications
             which are commensurate with the sensitivity of the system.

      15.    Conduct, or cause to be conducted, all activities required
             for the certification of the system, including preparing the
             certification and accreditation packages for final approval
             every three years or when major changes occur to the
             system, whichever is less.  Certification requirements are
             contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.3 of the "DOC IT
             Management Handbook and Section 3 of the "DOC IT
             Security Manual."

      16.    Coordinate with the operating unit Security Office or local
             Security Office on security matters of mutual interest (i.e.,
             IT Security).

      User Level - The primary purpose of IT systems is to support
      the missions of using organizations.  User management bears a
      great deal of responsibility for their systems and data.  In
      addition to defining the functions to be performed by the
      system, and its security requirements, the user is directly
      responsible for the system resources, such as terminals and
      printers, located within the user areas.  In order to assure
      adequate security within the user areas where these resources
      are located, user managers will appoint a user ITSSO to be
      responsible for the IT security within the user area.  This
      individual is responsible for implementing and enforcing the
      security program at the user's location.  The functions of the
      user ITSSO generally parallel those specified for the ITSSO.

      Each employee of the Department is responsible for the
      adequate protection of IT resources within their control or
      possession.


                                     SECTION 2
                   INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION
AND PLANNING

A.    Purpose:

      The purpose of this section is to establish Department of
      Commerce (DOC) policy to plan for adequate levels of security
      for each information technology (IT) system from its initial
      concept phase throughout its life cycle.  The objective of IT
      security planning is to improve protection of IT resources.  In
      order for plans for the protection of the resources to be
      adequate, the managers most directly affected by, and
      interested in the information or processing capabilities, must be
      comfortable that their information and/or processing
      capabilities are adequately protected from loss, misuse,
      unauthorized access or modification, unavailability, or
      undetected activities.

B.    Overview:

      The purpose of the system security plan is to provide a basic
      overview of the security and privacy requirements of the
      subject system and the system owner's plan for meeting those
      requirements.  The system security plan may also be viewed as
      documentation of the structured process of planning adequate,
      cost-effective security protection for a system.  Thus, it must
      reflect input from various managers with responsibility
      concerning the system, including functional "end users" or
      information owners, the system operator and the IT System
      Security Officer (ITSSO.)

      This document will discuss only the preparation and
      maintenance of the actual IT system security plan required by
      the "Computer Security Act of 1987", Public Law 100-235 and
      the format defined in Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
      Bulletin 90-08.  However, security planning is a vital part of the
      overall IT planning requirements for the system and should be
      included in the other IT plans as identified in Chapter 1 of the
      "DOC IT Management Handbook."

C.    Background and Authority:

      The DOC IT security plan requirements are established in
      compliance with the "Computer Security Act of 1987," Public
      Law 100-235, OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, "Security of
      Federal Automated Information Systems" and OMB Bulletin
      90-08, "Guidance for Preparation of Security Plans for Federal
      Computer Systems that Contain Sensitive Information."

D.    Scope:

      The policy contained in this document covers all DOC IT
      resources that have been identified as either sensitive or
      classified national security systems whether maintained in-house
      or commercially.

E.    Policy:

      The sensitivity level of all IT systems will be determined based
      on the sensitivity of the data processed or the importance of the
      system to mission accomplishment. All systems must include
      security controls that reflect the true importance of the
      information processed on the system and/or the government
      investment embodied in the components of the IT system.  The
      sensitivity level of all DOC IT systems will be identified in one
      of the following categories:

      1.     Classified National Security Systems contain information
             which requires protection against unauthorized disclosure
             in the interest of national security at either the Top
             Secret, Secret or Confidential level.  Procedural protection
             requirements for classified systems are contained in DAO
             207-2, "DOC National Security Information Manual." 
             Technical protection requirements are contained in
             Chapter 10, Section 10.19 of the "DOC IT Management
             Handbook" and Section 19 of the "DOC IT Security
             Manual."

      2.     Unclassified Sensitive Systems include those that require
             some degree of protection for confidentiality, integrity or
             availability.  This includes systems and data whose
             improper use or disclosure could adversely affect the
             ability of an agency to accomplish its mission, proprietary
             data, records about individuals requiring protection under
             the Privacy Act, and data not releasable under the
             Freedom of Information Act.  If the system is required for
             accomplishment of an agency mission it need not contain
             any sensitive data.

      3.     Non-Sensitive Systems are considered "trivial" as they
             contain only public data, which has no protection required
             for confidentiality or integrity, and the mission of the
             agency can be accomplished without the system.
  
      A security plan will be prepared in the format of Attachment
      1 to this document, "DOC Guidelines for Developing and
      Evaluating Security Plans for Sensitive and Classified Systems,"
      and submitted to the Department for all DOC application and
      general support systems that have been identified as sensitive
      or classified national security systems.  All IT systems will be
      identified as either application systems or general support
      systems:

      1.     Application Systems - Systems that perform clearly
             defined functions for which there are readily identifiable
             security considerations and needs.  Such a system might
             actually comprise many individual application programs
             and hardware, software, and telecommunications
             components.  They can be either a major software
             application or a combination of hardware/software where
             the only purpose of the system is to support a specific
             mission related function.  The system may process
             multiple individual applications, if all are related to a
             single mission function.

      2.     General Support Systems - These consist of hardware and
             software that provide general automated data processing
             or network support for a variety of users and applications. 
             Individual applications may be less easily distinguishable
             than in the previous category.  Single user systems, such
             as one or more personal computers may fit into this
             category if they process data related to more than one
             function.

F.    Responsibilities and Process:

      Operating Unit

      The Operating Unit Senior Information Resources Management
      Official will assure ownership is assigned for all IT resources
      within the operating unit (i.e., hardware, software, data,
      telecommunications, etc.)  This designation of ownership will
      become the foundation for determining who is responsible as
      "system owner" to define system boundaries, determine
      sensitivity levels and prepare and maintain the required
      individual IT system security plans.

      The Operating Unit IT Security Officer (ITSO) shall serve as
      the central point of contact for IT security and coordinate
      security plan requirements between the DOC IT Security
      Manager and the system owners within the operating unit.  The
      ITSO shall:

      1.     Assist the system owners in establishing logical boundaries
             for individual systems.

      2.     Assign each individual IT system a unique six digit
             identification number, which will identify the operating
             unit and the specific system.  The unique identification
             number will remain the same for the life of the system.

      3.     Establish and maintain a list of all IT systems within the
             operating unit and provide an up-to-date list to the DOC
             IT Security Manager annually.

      4.     Ensure that an IT System Security Officer (ITSSO) has
             been appointed for each IT system within the operating
             unit and maintain up-to-date records of these assignments.

      5.     Ensure IT system security plans are prepared in the
             proper format for all sensitive and classified IT systems
             owned and operated by the operating unit, including
             contractor owned systems, operated on behalf of the
             operating unit.

      6.     Review IT system security plans as submitted, making
             appropriate written comments, which will be sent to the
             originator for corrective action.  Evaluation of the plans
             will follow the "DOC Guidelines for Developing and
             Evaluating Security Plans for Sensitive and Classified
             Systems," Attachment 1, to this document.

      7.     Forward all corrected IT system security plans to the
             DOC IT Security Manager for comment or final approval
             and incorporation into the Department's records.

      8.     Maintain a tracking system concerning implementation of
             the required controls and accreditation status for all
             operating unit sensitive and classified systems.

      9.     Ensure that system owners review and update all plans, at
             least annually, to incorporate changes or completed
             milestone actions.  Forwarded updated plans to the DOC
             IT Security Manager for review and comment or
             approval.
      
      The System Owner will:

      1.     Evaluate all IT resources and establish logical boundaries
             for individual systems.  It is important that the boundaries
             of a system be properly identified to allow for completion
             of the system accreditation as required by OMB Circular
             A-130 and the DOC Accreditation policy contained in
             Chapter 10, Section 10.4 of the "DOC IT Management
             Handbook" and Section 4 of the "DOC IT Security
             Manual."

             A system is identified by logical boundaries being drawn
             around the various processing, communications, storage,
             and related resources.  They must be under the same
             direct management control with essentially the same
             function, reside in the same environment and have the
             same characteristics and security needs.

             A separate system security plan is required if a system
             does not meet the criteria for a single system.  If each site
             is not under the same "direct management control" and
             does not reside in the same environment, each site would
             be a separate system.  Each physical location would have
             its own unique environmental considerations.  Plans may
             be identical except for those items that are unique for the
             different hardware, environments and direct management
             controls.

             To be defined as a single system, all components need not
             be physically connected together (e.g., a group of two or
             more stand alone personal computers in an office may be
             identified as a single system if they meet all the criteria
             above.)

      2.     Appoint an individual to serve as the ITSSO for each IT
             system identified.  The ITSSO will be responsible for
             developing, implementing and managing the security of
             the system.  Ensure that the ITSSO is adequately trained
             to fulfill all responsibilities identified in Chapter 10,
             Section 10.1 of the "DOC IT Management Handbook"
             and Section 1 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      3.     Establish and maintain a list of all IT systems within the
             system owner's area of responsibility and provide a copy
             to the operating unit ITSO, as requested.

      4.     For each individual system identified, prepare an IT
             System Security Plan in the format outlined in Attachment
             1 of this document, "DOC Guidelines for Developing and
             Evaluating Security Plans for Sensitive and Classified
             Systems."   The guideline provides an outline of all
             required sections, with examples that fit into each
             category of control.  Application systems and general
             support systems require different sets of control categories
             and it is important to follow the correct format.

             The IT system security plan is intended to serve as a
             management tool for the system owner in determining the
             sensitivity level and protection requirements for the
             system.  The plan describes the control measures currently
             in place and any planned control that are intended to
             meet the protection requirements of the system and can
             assist in determining whether or not current security
             measures are adequate.  Properly documented, the plan
             can be used as a "mini-risk assessment" which can and
             should be used to determine what additional action and/or
             resources are required to bring this system in line with
             operational and security requirements.  The plan should
             be used to establish the actual milestones for completing
             requirements and can be an excellent internal
             management planning and decision-making tool. 

             Once completed, a security plan will contain detailed
             technical information about the system, its security
             requirements and the controls implemented to provide
             protection against its vulnerabilities.  All DOC security
             plans should be marked at least "FOR OFFICIAL USE
             ONLY" and handled and controlled as sensitive
             documents.  Security plans for classified systems should be
             carefully reviewed for classified content and may require
             higher level security classification and markings.

             All security plans must be dated.  This will allow ease of
             tracking modifications and approvals.

      5.     Forward the completed IT system security plan to the
             operating unit ITSO for review and comment.  The ITSO
             will provide written comments about any changes required
             to the plan.

      6.     Make changes to the IT system security plan, as
             requested, and return the plan to the operating unit ITSO
             for forwarding to the DOC IT Security Manager.

      7.     Maintain the IT system security plan in an up-to-date
             manner.  At least annually, the plan should be reviewed
             and updated to incorporate changes to the system or
             completed milestone actions.  Updated plans should be
             forwarded to the operating unit ITSO for review and
             comment.
 
      The DOC IT Security Manager will:

      1.     Maintain a list of all IT systems within the Department to
             ensure that all sensitive and classified IT systems have
             been accounted for and that the required security plans
             have been prepared and submitted.

      2.     Review all IT system security plans received from the
             operating units, making appropriate written comments
             which will be sent to the operating unit ITSO for
             corrective action.  Plans which do not require changes will
             be approved and a signed statement of approval will be
             issued for incorporation into the system owner's records.

      3.     Maintain a tracking system and records which will be
             used to monitor implementation of the required controls
             and accreditation status of all DOC IT systems.  


 

                                     SECTION 3
                                   CERTIFICATION

A.    Purpose:

      The purpose of this section is to establish Department of
      Commerce (DOC) policy for certification of all unclassified
      sensitive and classified national security Information
      Technology (IT) systems.

      1.     Classified National Security Systems contain information
             which requires protection against unauthorized disclosure
             in the interest of national security at either the Top
             Secret, Secret or Confidential level.  Procedural protection
             requirements for classified systems are contained in DAO
             207-2, "DOC National Security Information Manual." 
             Technical protection requirements are contained in
             Chapter 10, Section 10.19 of the "DOC IT Management
             Handbook" and Section 19 of the "DOC IT Security
             Manual."

      2.     Unclassified Sensitive Systems include those that require
             some degree of protection for confidentiality, integrity or
             availability.  This includes systems and data whose
             improper use or disclosure could adversely affect the
             ability of an agency to accomplish its mission, proprietary
             data, records about individuals requiring protection under
             the Privacy Act, and data not releasable under the
             Freedom of Information Act.  If the system is required for
             accomplishment of an agency mission it need not contain
             any sensitive data.

B.    Overview:

      Certification is based on a technical evaluation of a sensitive
      system to see how well it meets its security requirements,
      including all applicable federal policies, regulations, and
      standards.  The results of tests should demonstrate that the
      installed security safeguards are adequate and appropriate for
      the system.  The certification process is the final step leading to
      accreditation of the system.  Accreditation policy and
      procedures are included in Chapter 10, Section 10.4 of the
      "DOC IT Management Handbook," and Section 4 of the "DOC
      IT Security Manual."

      Protection requirements for each of the individual IT systems
      within the Department will vary according to the unique
      characteristics of the system, environmental concerns, data
      sensitivity and mission related criticality of the system or data. 
      Total protection against all threats may be an unrealistic goal. 
      Appropriate levels of security must be determined by an
      evaluation of the threats, vulnerabilities and risk factors
      associated with each system.  Cost-effective controls that are
      adequate to achieve an acceptable level of risk for the
      individual system must then be implemented.

C.    Background and Authority:

      Certification is a requirement of Office of Management and
      Budget (OMB) Circular Number A-130 and the "Computer
      Security Act of 1987," Public Law 100-235.

D.    Scope:

      Certification is a requirement for all sensitive and classified
      DOC General Support and Application systems.  New IT
      systems or those not fully operational shall complete all
      certification requirements and be accredited prior to full
      implementation.

      1.     Application Systems - Systems that perform clearly
             defined functions for which there are readily identifiable
             security considerations and needs.  Such a system might
             actually comprise many individual application programs
             and hardware, software, and telecommunications
             components.  They can be either a major software
             application or a combination of hardware/software where
             the only purpose of the system is to support a specific
             mission related function.  The system may process
             multiple individual applications, if all are related to a
             single mission function. 

      2.     General Support Systems - These consist of hardware and
             software that provide general automated data processing
             or network support for a variety of users and applications. 
             Individual applications may be less easily distinguishable
             than in the previous category, but such applications may
             contain sensitive information, or be critical to the mission
             accomplishment of the organization.  Even if none of the
             individual applications are sensitive, the support system
             itself may be considered sensitive if, the aggregate of
             applications and support provided are critical to the
             mission of the operating unit.

E.    Policy:

      Initial Certification

      Prior to accreditation, each IT system is to undergo appropriate
      technical certification evaluations to ensure that it meets all
      federal and DOC policies, regulations and standards and that
      all installed security safeguards appear to be adequate and
      appropriate for the protection requirements of the system. 
      Certification of the system is based on the documented results
      of the design reviews, system tests, and the recommendations of
      the testing teams.  All systems must include security controls
      that reflect the true importance of the information processed on
      the system and/or the government investment embodied in the
      components of the IT system.  Section F., of this document,
      identifies the required actions in the certification process.

      Interim Certification

      The certification process must be flexible enough that it
      accommodates the need for operational efficiency as well as
      adequate protection of the system.  There may be situations
      when the need for a system is such that it must be put into
      operation before a full certification is possible.  In this case, the
      Certifying Official can provisionally certify the system for
      operation, possibly with some restrictions, pending specific
      actions to be completed in a predefined time frame.  This
      interim certification cannot exceed one year.  These actions
      should also be included as milestones in the security plan for
      the system.  

      Recertification

      Systems will be recertified when substantial changes are made
      to the system, when changes in requirements result in the need
      to process data of a higher sensitivity, after the occurrence of
      a serious security violation which raises questions about the
      validity of an earlier certification, and in any case no less
      frequently than three years after the previous certification. 
      Examples of major changes include:

      1.     Changes in the system or software applications -
             Substantial changes which alter the mission, operating
             environment or basic vulnerabilities of the system.
             Increase or decrease in hardware, application programs,
             external users, hardware upgrades, addition of
             telecommunications capability, dial-in lines, changes to
             program logic of application systems, relocation of system
             to new physical environment or new organization.  Minor
             changes such as, replacement of similar hardware when
             capacity does not significantly change, addition of two or
             three workstations on a network or small modifications to
             an application program (e.g., table headings are changed)
             would not require recertification.

      2.     Changes in protection requirements - Changes in the
             sensitivity or classification level of the data being
             processed, increase in the mission criticality of the system
             or changes in federal or DOC policies.

      3.     Occurrence of a significant violation - A violation or
             incident that calls into question the adequacy of the
             system security controls.

      4.     Audit or evaluation findings - Findings from any security
             review that identifies significant unprotected risks.  These
             could include the system IT security verification review,
             physical or information security inspection, internal
             control reviews, Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
             audits or General Accounting Office (GAO) audits.

F.    Responsibilities and Process:

      Certification evaluations are conducted by the organization that
      owns the system.  The official certification document is signed
      by a senior management official in the system owning
      organization.  Chapter 10, Section 10.1 of the "DOC IT
      Management Handbook" and Section 1 of the "DOC IT
      Security Manual" contain specific information about
      designation of ownership of IT systems and data.  Owners of
      DOC IT systems will complete all required certification actions,
      issue a certification statement and prepare an accreditation
      package which will be forwarded to the Designated Approving
      Authority for formal accreditation of the system.  A sample
      certification statement and request for accreditation is
      contained in Attachment 1 of this document.

      The information included in the certification documentation will
      contain details about the system, which may identify weaknesses
      or vulnerabilities which require protection against disclosure to
      persons without an official need to know.  Certification
      documentation for sensitive systems will be marked at least
      "For Official Use Only."  Classified IT system certification
      documentation will be marked in accordance with appropriate
      national security directives and DAO 207-2, "DOC National
      Security Information Manual."
      
      Certification Review Team

      A Certification Review Team should be established to conduct
      the technical  evaluation of the system.  The Certification
      Review Team should get input from all who have involvement
      with the system, including: IT security staff; system owner
      staff; computer program development staff, if the application
      was developed in-house; the computer operations staff, if the
      application is run on a computer managed by a separate
      organization; and users.  Representatives from as many of these
      organizations as possible should be included on the Certification
      Review Team.

      The Certification Review Team will be responsible for
      performing all actions required for the certification evaluation,
      evaluating the results and preparing a report with
      recommendations for the system owner about certification of
      the system.

      Certification Testing of Security Controls

      The technical certification evaluation results are the basis for
      the system owner's certification statement in the accreditation
      request.  The letter should state what methods were used to
      perform the certification evaluation.

      The first step in the certification process is to determine what
      the protection requirements for the IT system should be, based
      on the sensitivity or criticality of the individual system.  Once
      these requirements are defined, cost-effective controls can be
      selected and implemented that will provide adequate protection
      to achieve an acceptable level of risk.

      The goal of the technical certification evaluation is to test
      existing controls to determine: (1) if controls function properly;
      (2) if controls satisfy performance criteria and provide for
      availability, survivability and accuracy; and (3) if the controls
      can be easily broken or circumvented.  The technical
      certification evaluation can be accomplished by two or more of
      the following:

      System Owner Evaluation and Testing

      Security controls installed and implemented require testing to
      ensure they meet the defined security requirements for the
      system and that they function as expected.  System owners
      should maintain documented results of these tests, which can be
      used as part of the certification review.  In addition to specific
      tests of individual controls, evaluation of the overall system may
      also be performed.  These evaluations may take the form of
      checklists or other methods that ensure consideration has been
      given to all security requirements and controls.  Copies of
      evaluation results should be included in the certification report
      included in the accreditation package.  The Department has
      developed and approved two separate methodologies which can
      be used by the system owner in planning and conducting the
      required certification evaluation.  Each of these methodologies
      provides a structured process that will ensure that all
      appropriate actions have been completed and documented.  The
      system owner should select one of the following methodologies
      for the Certification Review Team's use:

      1.     "Methodology for Certifying Sensitive Computer
             Applications," contained in Attachment 2 of this document
             is especially suited for large complicated software
             applications, for applications which are in-house developed
             or involve extensive modifications to customize for
             Commerce use, applications with very high sensitivity such
             as major financial applications which process high dollar
             amounts or are subject to fraud or abuse, or for new
             applications without existing security documentation.

      2.     "Abbreviated Certification Methodology for Sensitive IT
             Systems," contained in Attachment 3 of this document is
             an abbreviated form of the above methodology.  It was
             developed to address existing sensitive systems with
             extensive documentation already available.  It is intended
             to handle the certification evaluation requirements of
             smaller systems and systems and applications such as
             those associated with personal computers or those systems
             with only a few users, and turn-key or commercial
             systems which were procured against a detailed set of
             security specifications.  It can be used for completing the
             technical certification evaluation requirements for both
             application systems and general support systems.

      Other Internal Reviews

      The results of any security related reviews performed by
      evaluation teams internal to the operating unit or the system
      owner's organization may be used as part of the certification
      evaluation.  These reviews may include internal control reviews,
      physical or information security inspections or IT security
      verification reviews.  Corrective actions resulting from any
      review findings should be tested and documented.  Copies of
      review findings and corrective actions taken should be included
      in the certification documentation for the accreditation package. 
      

      External Reviews

      The results of any audits performed by independent external
      organizations may also be used as part of the certification
      evaluation.  These audits or reviews may have been performed
      by the OIG, GAO, DOC or commercial Electronic Data
      Processing (EDP) audit firms.  Implementation of any
      corrective actions taken as a result of these audit findings
      should be tested and documented.  Copies of audit findings and
      corrective actions taken should be included in the certification
      documentation for the accreditation package.

      For classified IT systems, external organizations such as
      Department of Defense, National Security Agency, State
      Department, Central Intelligence Agency, etc., who have specific
      requirements for data under their area of responsibility, may
      also perform reviews and inspections.  Any authorizations or
      approvals provided by these external organizations are
      important certification documentation and must be provided
      with the request for accreditation.

      Risk Analysis
      
      Risk analysis can play a dual role in the evaluation process.  It
      can be used to help determine important security requirements
      for the IT system and also to evaluate the existing and planned
      controls for cost-effective risk reduction.  Since risk analysis
      must be performed throughout the life cycle of the system, it
      provides a method for reassessing the risks against system
      changes and determining additional controls required to bring
      the system to an acceptable level of risk.




                                   ATTACHMENT 1
                                         
                    SAMPLE CERTIFICATION STATEMENT AND REQUEST
FOR ACCREDITATION



MEMORANDUM FOR:   (Designated Approving Authority)

FROM:              (System Owner)

SUBJECT:                 Request for Accreditation of DOC IT System                
                         Number ______, "ABC Computer Center"


Attached is the required accreditation documentation for DOC
Information Technology (IT) System Number ______, "ABC
Computer Center."  Based on the information contained in these
documents, I certify (with the exceptions or clarifications noted
below) that this system meets all federal and DOC policies,
regulations and standards and that all installed security safeguards
appear to be adequate and appropriate for the sensitivity of this
system. 

The methods used to perform the certification evaluation included
testing installed controls, completing a checklist for evaluating
implemented controls against defined security requirements and
implementing additional controls recommended by the Office of
Inspector General (OIG) audit.

                          (exceptions or clarifications)

Weighing the remaining residual risks against operational
requirements, I recommend that you authorize (continued) operation
of this IT system (under the following restrictions):

                                (restrictions)     
                                   ATTACHMENT 2

        (Methodology published in 1988 is still usable, but being revised)



                           U. S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

                             ABBREVIATED CERTIFICATION
                                    METHODOLOGY
                                    GUIDELINES

                           FOR SENSITIVE AND CLASSIFIED 
                              INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
SYSTEMS












                                 December 1, 1992

                           U. S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
                             ABBREVIATED CERTIFICATION
METHODOLOGY
                             FOR SENSITIVE INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


A.    INTRODUCTION

      It is the policy of the Department of
      Commerce (DOC) to comply fully with all
      federal statutes and directives on information
      technology (IT) security and to provide
      protection commensurate with the sensitivity of
      the systems or data processed.  

      Protection requirements for each of the
      individual IT systems within the Department
      will vary according to the unique
      characteristics of the system, environmental
      concerns, data sensitivity and mission related
      criticality of the system or data.  Appropriate
      levels of security must be determined by an
      evaluation of the threats, vulnerabilities and
      risk factors associated with each system.  Cost-
      effective controls that are adequate to achieve
      an acceptable level of risk for the individual
      system must then be implemented.

      The DOC "Information Technology
      Accreditation Policy" issued on July 6, 1992
      established the requirement for accreditation of
      all unclassified sensitive and classified national
      security IT systems.  Accreditation is the
      authorization and approval, granted to a
      sensitive or classified IT system to process, as
      an acceptable risk, in an operational
      environment.  Accreditation is made on the
      basis of recommendations from a technical
      certification evaluation that the IT system
      meets all applicable federal and DOC policies,
      regulations, and standards and that all installed
      security safeguards appear to be adequate and
      appropriate for the sensitivity of the system;
      that they are operating correctly; or, that the
      system must be operated under certain
      specified conditions or constraints.  

      The technical certification evaluation results
      are the basis for the system owner's
      certification statement in the accreditation
      request.

B.    PURPOSE

      The purpose of this document is to provide
      guidance on appropriate procedures to follow
      in performing the technical certification
      evaluations of all sensitive and classified
      national security systems within the
      Department. 

      The DOC issued a "Methodology for
      Certifying Sensitive Computer Applications" in
      March 1987.  The process described in that
      document was required for any new DOC
      applications or any modification of existing
      applications that handle sensitive information. 
      It is especially suited for large complicated
      applications, for applications which are in-
      house developed or involve extensive
      modifications to customize for Commerce use,
      applications with very high sensitivity such as
      major financial applications which process high
      dollar amounts or are subject to fraud or abuse,
      or for new applications without existing
      security documentation.  This original
      certification methodology should be used for
      systems meeting the above criteria.  

      That methodology has proved to be far too
      complex for many of the Department's
      systems.  The methodology described in this
      document is an abbreviated form of this
      process, developed to address existing sensitive
      systems with extensive documentation already
      available.   It is intended to handle smaller
      systems and applications such as those
      associated with personal computers (PCs) or
      those systems with only a few users, and turn-
      key or commercial systems which were
      procured against a detailed set of security
      specifications.  This abbreviated methodology
      stresses the use of existing documentation
      wherever possible.  It can be used for
      completing the technical certification
      evaluation requirements for both application
      systems and general support systems.  The
      term "system" used in this document is
      intended to mean either of the following, as
      appropriate: 

      1.     Application Systems - Systems that
             perform clearly defined functions for which
             there are readily identifiable security
             considerations and needs.  Such a system
             might actually comprise many individual
             application programs and hardware,
             software, and telecommunications
             components.  They can be either a major
             software application or a combination of
             hardware/software where the only purpose
             of the system is to support a specific
             mission related function.  The system may
             process multiple individual applications, if
             all are related to a single mission function.

      2.     General Support Systems - These consist of
             hardware and software that provide general
             automated data processing or network
             support for a variety of users and
             applications.  Individual applications may
             be less easily distinguishable than in the
             previous category, but such applications
             may contain sensitive information, or be
             critical to the mission accomplishment of
             the organization.  Even if none of the
             individual applications are sensitive, the
             support system itself may be considered
             sensitive if the aggregate of applications
             and support provided are critical to the
             mission of the operating unit.

C.    ABBREVIATED CERTIFICATION
METHODOLOGY

      Certification is based on a technical evaluation
      of a sensitive system to see how well it meets
      its security requirements, including all
      applicable federal policies, regulations, and
      standards.  The results of tests should
      demonstrate that the installed security
      safeguards are adequate and appropriate for the
      system.  The certification process is the final
      step leading to accreditation of the system. 
      Sensitive systems will be recertified and
      reaccredited when substantial changes are made
      to the system, when changes in requirements
      result in the need to process data of a higher
      sensitivity, after the occurrence of a serious
      security violation which raises questions about
      the validity of an earlier certification, and in all
      cases no less frequently than three years after a
      previous certification.

      Certification evaluations are conducted by the
      organization that owns the system.  The
      certification team should get input from all
      who have involvement with the system,
      including:

            IT security staff, 

            system owner staff, 

            computer program development staff, if the
             application was developed in-house, and 

            the computer operations staff, if the
             application is run on a computer managed
             by a separate organization.  

            users

      Representatives from as many of these
      organizations as possible should be included on
      the Certification Review Team.

      The certification methodology described in this
      document consists of the following steps,
      which will be described more fully in the rest
      of this document:

             Step 1.  Assemble a team
             Step 2.  Collect existing documents
             Step 3.  Describe the system and its
      sensitivity
             Step 4.  Identify protection requirements
      and vulnerabilities
             Step 5.  Identify security features needed
             Step 6.  Test the adequacy of controls
             Step 7.  Evaluate test results
             Step 8.  Certify the system

      Worksheet forms to document each step in the
      certification process are provided in Appendix
      A.

      Definitions

      Certification is a technical evaluation of a
      sensitive system to see how well it meets
      necessary security requirements, such as
      appropriate federal policies, regulations, and
      standards.  

      The Certifying Official is a senior manager in
      the organization which owns the system.  The
      system owner is the organization which has
      functional responsibility for the system.  The
      Certifying Official should be a manager who
      was responsible for having the system
      developed or the functional area that the
      system supports, who has a need for the results
      produced by the system, and can allocate
      resources to correct deficiencies in the security
      controls for the system.

      The Certification Review Team will collect the
      information needed for the certification
      process, identify vulnerabilities, develop a list
      of needed security features, develop tests of the
      adequacy of the features, and evaluate the test
      results.

      Security features are controls that protect
      against the identified vulnerabilities, such as
      fire and water alarms, passwords and other
      access protection, use of removable media for
      data storage, data validation controls, audit
      trails, uninterruptable power sources to protect
      against electrical outages, personnel screening,
      IT security awareness training of users, etc.

      A sensitive system is one that requires some
      degree of protection for confidentiality,
      integrity or availability.  This includes data
      whose improper use or disclosure could
      adversely affect the ability of an agency to
      accomplish its mission, proprietary data,
      records about individuals requiring protection
      under the privacy Act, and data not releasable
      under the Freedom of Information Act.  If the
      system is required for accomplishment of an
      agency mission it need not contain any
      sensitive data.   

      Test scenarios are descriptions of the tests to
      be performed to check the effectiveness of the
      security features incorporated into the system. 
      They may include validation of password
      constraints such as length and composition of
      the password, entry of erroneous data to check
      data validation controls, review of audit
      information produced by the system, review of
      contingency plans and risk analyses, etc.

      Vulnerabilities are ways in which the system
      may be attacked or may fail.  They include
      susceptibility to physical dangers such as fire
      or water, unauthorized access to sensitive data,
      entry of erroneous data, denial of timely
      service, fraud, etc.

      Methodology Approach

      Step 1 - Assemble a team:  The first step in
      the abbreviated process is to assemble a team
      to gather the information and documentation
      needed to assess and demonstrate the adequacy
      of security measures used.  The team should
      include representatives of IT security,
      application owners, software development,
      computer systems, and users.  For very small
      systems the users, software programming staff,
      and computer systems staffs may be the same. 
      The IT security staff provides an outside
      viewpoint to ensure that the best IT security
      practices are used in protecting sensitive
      systems.  Where computer system staff,
      software programmers, and users are in
      separate organizations, it is important that all
      points of view are represented in the process,
      to ensure that user expectations of protection
      needs are addressed, and that software and
      computer system constraints are understood.

      Step 2 - Collect existing documents needed
      for the certification evaluation:  These
      documents include, but are not limited to:

             1.    system specifications and
      documentation
             2.    system security plan
             3.    risk analysis
             4.    contingency and disaster recovery plans
             5.    staff records on personnel and the IT
                   Security Officer identification, training
                   and position sensitivity levels 
             6.    Internal Control Reviews, security
      reviews, etc., if existing

      Step 3 - Identify and describe the system to
      be certified and describe why it is sensitive: 
      It is necessary to have a written description of
      the purpose of the system, the hardware and
      software environment on which the system is
      operated, and a description of the sensitivity of
      the system, including any special applicable
      laws and regulations.  This information is
      readily available in the Sensitive System
      Security Plan for the system being certified.  If
      the certification is for a software application
      system that will be used by others, the
      hardware description should address the
      hardware needed to operate the system, but the
      certification should focus on the software
      application program.  Complete the blank
      sections of Sensitive System Certification
      Worksheet 1, System Description and attach a
      copy of the approved Sensitive System
      Security Plan for the system being evaluated. 
      The Worksheet identifies the section numbers
      in the security plan where detailed information
      can be obtained for review.

      Step 4 - Identify protection requirements
      and vulnerabilities:  Review the description of
      the protection requirements for the system
      under the headings confidentiality, integrity,
      and availability in Section II.B. of the
      Sensitive System 
      Security Plan.  Enter the levels of protection
      required (high, medium, low) in the blanks
      provided on Worksheet 1.  

      Identify vulnerabilities for the system related to
      these protection requirements.  Most
      vulnerabilities will be addressed in the existing
      documents collected in Step 2.  All sensitive
      systems should have a completed risk analysis. 
      The risk analysis will identify vulnerabilities
      and their consequences, such as unauthorized
      disclosure of information, loss of data or other
      resources, denial of service, decisions based on
      erroneous information, etc.  System
      documentation is another source of information
      about the vulnerabilities.  The security plan for
      the system being evaluated contains
      information about specific vulnerabilities and
      control measures addressed.  The team should
      also review any existing Internal Control,
      Inspector General (IG) or security review
      reports on the system, for additional
      information on system vulnerabilities.  In
      addition to the documentation, the team may
      need to interview managers in the user
      organization to ascertain their concerns about
      the sensitivity of the system and the level of
      protection required.

      Complete the Sensitive System Certification
      Worksheet 2: Identified Vulnerabilities by
      listing the identified vulnerabilities.

      Step 5 - Identify security features needed: 
      The team next needs to review existing
      documents to identify the controls in place to
      address the vulnerabilities identified above. 
      The risk analysis, security plans, and system
      documentation reviewed for vulnerabilities also
      contain information on controls used to reduce
      those vulnerabilities.  System specifications, if
      they still exist, will also provide information on
      the controls designed into the system.  The
      team will also need to review the contingency
      and disaster recovery plans for the system. 
      The team should interview the IT System
      Security Officer to review installation IT
      security procedures.  Staff training records will
      show the level of IT security training given to
      application and computer installation staff. 
      Staff records should also show the sensitivity
      designation of staff positions and any personnel
      investigations, required and conducted, for staff
      in the affected positions.  Complete the
      Sensitive System Certification Worksheet 3:
      Security Features.

      Step 6 - Test adequacy of controls:  Once
      vulnerabilities and controls have been
      identified, the team should selectively check
      the adequacy of the controls.  Some live tests
      may be needed to ensure that documented
      controls actually work.  Other controls may be
      reviewed through other means.  Previous
      system reviews and system acceptance tests
      may contain records of tests previously
      performed.  It is not necessary to repeat these
      tests, if the system has not changed since they
      were done.  The review of vulnerabilities and
      controls should identify any areas not
      adequately addressed.  Sensitive System
      Certification Worksheet 4: Security Tests is
      used to list the tests to be performed.  Use
      Sensitive System Certification Worksheet 5:
      Security Test Results to record the results of
      the tests.  

      Step 7 - Evaluate the test results:  Once all
      tests are completed, a summary of the
      evaluation of the tests should be prepared. The
      team should then prepare recommendations
      about certification.  Sensitive System
      Certification Worksheet 6: Evaluation and
      Recommendations is used to record the
      evaluation of test results and the team's
      recommendation.  The recommendation section
      should be signed by all members of the team
      and dated.  
 
            If the tests results indicate that all
             protection requirements have been met, the
             team can recommend certification with no
             further action required.

            The Certification Review Team may
             determine from the test results that the
             protection requirements were not met for
             the system.  In that case, the evaluation
             discussion of test results should explain the
             inadequacy of the controls in place.

            The team may alternatively certify that the
             basic protection requirements have been
             met, but recommend additional features be
             required.  This latter form of certification
             is appropriate for certifying a software
             application system which must have certain
             operating system or hardware features in
             place for approved operation.  This may
             also be used in recommending interim
             accreditation pending installation of some
             additional control not currently available.  

      Step 8 - Certification:  The official
      Certification document is signed by a senior
      management official in the system owning
      organization.  A sample certification document
      is attached as Appendix B.

      There may be situations when the need for a
      system is such that it must be put into
      operation before a full certification is possible. 
      In this case, the Certifying Official can
      provisionally certify the system for operation,
      possibly with some restrictions, pending
      specific actions to be completed in a
      predefined time frame.  This interim
      certification cannot exceed one year.  These
      actions should also be included as milestones
      in the security plan for the system.  The
      certification process must be flexible enough
      that it accommodates the need for operational
      efficiency as well as adequate protection of the
      system.

                                    APPENDIX A

                          SENSITIVE SYSTEM CERTIFICATION
WORKSHEETS

This Appendix contains a set of six worksheets to
assist with documenting the certification evaluation
of the system.  Each worksheet is preceded by a
set of instructions and definitions which will
provide guidance for completing the evaluation and
the worksheet.

                             DIRECTIONS FOR COMPLETING
WORKSHEET 1: 
                                SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

Much of the information requested on Worksheet 1
is contained in the Security Plan for the system. 
To avoid having to rewrite this information and
have a ready reference to the needed information,
attach a copy of the Security Plan behind
Worksheet 1.  Each worksheet contains blank lines,
where information must be entered.  This step is
important to avoid confusion with other system
certification evaluation documentation. 

System Name/Title is the name of the system used
in the Security Plan for a sensitive system (Section
I.B of the Security Plan).  To avoid confusion with
other certification evaluation documentation this
should be written on all worksheets.  

System ID is the unique six digit system
identification number assigned for each sensitive
system in the Department.  Again, to avoid
confusion with other certification evaluation
documentation this should be written on all
worksheets.

System Owner is the name of the contact person
in the owning organization who is knowledgeable
about the system and protection requirements.  It
may be the person listed as Information Contact
(Section I.G) in the Security Plan.  Provide full
address and phone number, including area code, for
the owner.

Developer is the name of the person who is
responsible for developing the software.  If this is
a commercial application, put the name of the
organization in this space.  If there is no developer
or the developer's name is unknown, put "none" in
this space.

General Description/Purpose is a description of
the function and purpose of the system.  This
information is contained in Section I.E of the
Security Plan.

System Environment and Special Considerations
is a description of the computer and software
environment of the system.  This information is
contained in Section I.F of the Security Plan.

Sensitivity of Information Handled describes why
the system is sensitive.  

      Applicable Laws and Regulations lists any
      laws and regulations that specifically apply to
      this system, such as the Privacy Act.  This
      information is contained in Section II.A of the
      Security Plan.

      General Description of Information
      Sensitivity is a description of why the system
      is sensitive and the nature of that sensitivity. 
      This information is contained in the
      introduction to Section II.B of the Security
      Plan.

Description of Protection Requirements
describes what makes the system sensitive.  The
descriptions of protection needs for confidentiality,
integrity, and availability are contained in Section
II.B of the Security Plan.  Write in the designated
level (high, medium, low) in the blanks provided.
                          SENSITIVE SYSTEM CERTIFICATION
WORKSHEET 1
                                SYSTEM DESCRIPTIONSystem Name/TitleSystem
ID:
System Owner

Address:            _______________________________
                    _______________________________
                    _
              __________________________________
              _____________________________
Phone:        __________________________________
              _____________________________Programmer/Developer:

Address:            _______________________________
                    _______________________________
                    _
              __________________________________
              _____________________________
Phone:        __________________________________
              _____________________________General Description/Purpose
  (See Section I.E. of attached security plan.)
System Environment and Special Consideration
  (See Section I.F. of attached security plan).

Sensitivity of Information Handled:
  Applicable Laws and Regulations Affecting the
System
  (See Section II.A. of attached security plan.)

General Description of Information Sensitivity
  (See Section II.B. of attached security plan.)
Description of Protection Requirements
  See Section II.B. of attached security plan and
fill in the designated level (high, medium, low) in
the blanks.

Confidentiality ______

Integrity ______

Availability ______


                             DIRECTIONS FOR COMPLETING
WORKSHEET 2: 
                            IDENTIFIED VULNERABILITIES


System Name/Title and System ID are the same
as on Worksheet 1.

Description of Identified Vulnerabilities should
include the vulnerabilities that the system may
have prior to putting controls in place.  These
should have been identified in the risk analysis. 
They might include physical vulnerabilities such as
fire or disk crashes, entry of erroneous data, denial
of service, and unauthorized access to information.
                          SENSITIVE SYSTEM CERTIFICATION
WORKSHEET 2
                            IDENTIFIED VULNERABILITIESSystem Name/TitleSystem
ID:

Description of Identified Vulnerabilities
  (From Risk Analysis, Security Plan, system
documentation, interviews and other review 













                             DIRECTIONS FOR COMPLETING
                                                                WORKSHEET 3: 
                                 SECURITY FEATURES


System Name/Title and System ID are the same
as on Worksheet 1.

Description of Security Features is a list of the
security features used to protect this system.  They
can be taken from Sections III.C of the Security
Plan and include Management Controls,
Development/Implementation Controls for
application systems,
Acquisition/Development/Installation Controls for
general support systems, Operational Controls,
Security Awareness and Training, Technical
Controls and Complementary Controls Provided by
General Support Systems for application systems or
Controls Over the Security of Applications for
general support systems.

Although, it is not necessary to include the level of
detail contained in the Security Plan, the controls
should be listed to provide a foundation for
selecting tests to be performed to verify if the
controls are adequate and appropriate and are
operating as expected.
                          SENSITIVE SYSTEM CERTIFICATION
WORKSHEET 3
                                 SECURITY FEATURESSystem Name/TitleSystem
ID:
Description of Security Features:























                             DIRECTIONS FOR COMPLETING
WORKSHEET 4:
                                  SECURITY TESTS


System Name/Title and System ID are the same
as on Worksheet 1.

Test Scenarios should contain a numbered list of
the tests to be preformed to verify the controls
listed on Worksheet 3.  For more detail about the
controls, see Section III.C. of the security plan.  

            If this is an existing system that has been
             in operation for some time, the tests may
             selectively test the most critical controls. 

            If the system is under, or just completed
             development, or is a turn-key system, all
             security controls should be tested.

            If testing has been done for a another
             recent review, or during recent acceptance
             testing of the system, it may not be
             necessary to repeat the tests.  It will be
             necessary to review records of the prior
             tests, and determine if the documentation
             of the tests and results are adequate.   If it
             is determined that it is not justified to
             repeat the tests, a statement should be
             included on Worksheet 4 explaining the
             reason.  Also, include enough information
             about all supporting documentation
             reviewed, to allow it to be located for
             future reference.  At a minimum, include a
             list of tests from the documentation, that
             were performed.  This list need not contain
             as much detail for each individual test as
             the referenced documentation. 

                          SENSITIVE SYSTEM CERTIFICATION
WORKSHEET 4
                                  SECURITY TESTSSystem Name/TitleSystem
ID:
Test Scenario:























                             DIRECTIONS FOR COMPLETING
WORKSHEET 5:
                               SECURITY TEST RESULTS


System Name/Title and System ID are the same
as on Worksheet 1.

Test Results reports the results of each of the tests
described on Worksheet 4.  The numbers on
Worksheet 5 for each test result should agree with
the numbers on Worksheet 4 for the test
description.  Indicate whether the was "Passed" or
"Failed".


                          SENSITIVE SYSTEM CERTIFICATION
WORKSHEET 5
                               SECURITY TEST RESULTSSystem Name/TitleSystem
ID:
Test Results:























                             DIRECTIONS FOR COMPLETING
WORKSHEET 6:
                          EVALUATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS


System Name/Title and System ID are the same
as on Worksheet 1.

Evaluation of Test Results should discuss the
results of the tests and their relationship to assuring
the adequacy of controls.

Under Recommendations check one of the three
responses.  

            Check Tests indicate that protection
             requirements were met if all tests resulted
             in correct results.

            Check Tests indicate that protection
             requirements were not met if some tests
             failed and corrections have not been, or
             cannot be implemented.

            Check Tests indicate that protection
             requirements were met; recommend
             certification with the following additional
             security features required: if there are
             additional security controls needed to meet
             the protection requirements.  This category
             should be used when certifying software
             applications that require hardware or
             operating system features to assure
             adequate protection.  It should also be used
             if an interim certification is being
             recommended, pending completion of
             specific actions.

Certifying Team Signatures should included
printed names of the certifying team members, a
signature, and a date for each team member.

                          SENSITIVE SYSTEM CERTIFICATION
WORKSHEET 6
                          EVALUATION AND RECOMMENDATIONSSystem Name/TitleSyste
m ID:
Evaluation of Test Results:







Recommendations:

        _____       Tests indicate that protection
                    requirements were met.
              RECOMMEND CERTIFICATION OF
              THIS SYSTEM.

        _____       Tests indicate that protection
                    requirements were not met. 
                    RECOMMEND THAT THIS SYSTEM
                    NOT BE CERTIFIED.

        _____       Tests indicate that protection
                    requirements were met; recommend
                    certification with the following
                    additional security features required:




Certifying Team Signatures


     Name                        Signature               
              Date


                                    Appendix B

                          Sample Certification Statement


I have carefully examined the certification
worksheets for DOC Information Technology
System Number _________, "Insert system
name/title", dated ___________________ .  Based
on the information contained in this package and
the results of tests conducted on the system, it is
my judgment that satisfactory information
technology controls are in place to adequately
protect the system and that it is operating at an
acceptable level of risk.  

I hereby certify DOC IT System Number
________, "Insert system name/title", for a period
not to exceed three years.  Should substantial
changes or security incidents occur during that
three year period, which bring the adequacy of the
protection measures for this system into question, a
reevaluation and recertification must be completed
earlier.




Certification Official Name/Title: 

      _______________________________________
      _______                                      
      _______________________________________
      _______


Signature:
__________________________________________
___  Date: ____________


                                       SECTION 4
                                   ACCREDITATION

A.    Purpose:           

      The purpose of this section is to establish
      Department of Commerce (DOC) policy for
      accreditation of all unclassified sensitive and
      classified national security Information
      Technology (IT) systems.  

B.    Overview:          

      Accreditation is the authorization and approval,
      granted to a sensitive or classified IT system to
      process, as an acceptable risk, in an operational
      environment.  Accreditation is made on the
      basis of recommendations from a technical
      certification evaluation that the IT system
      meets all applicable federal and DOC policies,
      regulations, and standards and that all installed
      security safeguards appear to be adequate and
      appropriate for the sensitivity of the system;
      that they are operating correctly; or, that the
      system must be operated under certain
      specified conditions or constraints. 

C.    Background and Authority:                          

      Accreditation is a requirement of Office of
      Management and Budget (OMB) Circular
      Number A-130 and the "Computer Security
      Act of 1987," Public Law 100-235.

D.    Scope:       

      The policy contained in this document covers
      all DOC IT systems, whether maintained in-
      house or commercially.

      Accreditation is required for all sensitive and
      classified DOC General Support and
      Application systems.  New IT systems or those
      not fully operational shall complete all
      requirements and be accredited prior to full
      implementation.

E.    Policy:      

      This policy defines the final step in the IT
      Security management process that ensures
      protection of the vital IT resources within the
      Department.  

      Initial Accreditation

      All sensitive and classified DOC IT General
      Support or Application systems will be
      accredited.  The term accreditation describes
      the process whereby information pertaining to
      the security of a system is developed, analyzed
      and submitted for approval to the appropriate
      senior management official identified in this
      document as the Designated Approving
      Authority (DAA).  Section F, of this document,
      identifies the required steps in the accreditation
      process.  The DAA will review the
      accreditation support documentation and either
      concur, thereby declaring that a satisfactory
      level of operational security is present or not
      concur, indicating that the level of risk either
      has not been adequately defined or reduced to
      an acceptable level for operational
      requirements.  The DAA will sign a formal
      accreditation statement declaring that the
      system appears to be operating at an acceptable
      level of risk, or defining any conditions or
      constraints that are required for appropriate
      system protection.  Sample accreditation
      statements are contained in Attachment 1 of
      this document.

      Security of classified IT systems operated by,
      or in support of DOC programs is the
      responsibility of the Department and these
      systems must be accredited in accordance with
      the requirements defined in this policy. 
      Approvals granted by external agencies, i.e.,
      Department of State, Department of Defense,
      Central Intelligence Agency, etc., are not valid
      authority to operate classified IT systems
      within the Department.  Approvals granted to
      these systems by DOC, prior to this policy, are
      no longer in effect and new approval to operate
      must be granted through the DOC accreditation
      process.        

      Interim Accreditation

      Interim authority to operate can be granted for
      a fixed period of time, not to exceed one year. 
      This authority is based on an approved security
      plan and is contingent on certain conditions
      being met.  The interim authority to operate,
      while continuing the accreditation process,
      permits the IT system to meet its operational
      mission requirements while improving its IT
      security posture.  If the DAA is not satisfied
      that the IT system is protected at an acceptable
      level of risk, an interim accreditation can be
      granted to allow time for implementation of
      additional controls.  Recommendation or
      request for an interim accreditation may be
      made by the IT system owner, the operating
      unit IT Security Officer (ITSO) or the DAA. 
      Interim authority to operate is not a waiver of
      the requirement for accreditation.  The IT
      system must meet all requirements and be fully
      accredited by the interim accreditation
      expiration date.  No extensions of interim
      accreditation can be granted except by the
      DOC Director for Information Resources
      Management. 

      Reaccreditation

      Systems will be reaccredited when major
      changes occur to the system or every three
      years, whichever occurs first.  Examples of
      major changes include:

      1.     Changes in the system or software
             applications - Substantial changes which
             alter the mission, operating environment or
             basic vulnerabilities of the system. Increase
             or decrease in hardware, application
             programs, external users, hardware
             upgrades, addition of telecommunications
             capability, dial-in lines, changes to program
             logic of application systems, relocation of
             system to new physical environment or
             new organization.  Minor changes such as,
             replacement of similar hardware when
             capacity does not significantly change,
             addition of two or three workstations on a
             network or small modifications to an
             application program (e.g., table headings
             are changed) would not require
             reaccreditation.

      2.     Changes in protection requirements -
             Changes in the sensitivity or classification
             level of the data being processed, increase
             in the mission criticality of the system or
             changes in federal or DOC policies.

      3.     Occurrence of a significant violation - A
             violation or incident that calls into question
             the adequacy of the system security
             controls.

      4.     Audit or evaluation findings - Findings
             from any security review that identifies
             significant unprotected risks.  These could
             include the system security verification
             review, physical or information security
             inspection, internal control reviews, Office
             of the Inspector General (OIG) audits or
             General Accounting Office (GAO) audits.

      Prior to reaccreditation, an on-site IT security
      verification review must be conducted by an
      evaluation team under the direction of the
      DOC IT Security Manager, the operating unit
      ITSO or the ITSO of a subordinate
      organizational unit (i.e., Line Office, Regional
      Office, Laboratory, etc.)  The IT security
      verification review team may not be under the
      direction of personnel from the subordinate
      organization having direct control over the IT
      system being evaluated.  The IT System
      Security Officer (ITSSO) for the system under
      review should participate as a member of the
      IT security verification review team.  The
      purpose of this review is to ensure that all
      controls and vulnerabilities are properly
      documented, and that adequate and appropriate
      levels of security exist for protection of the
      system.  Requirements and guidance for
      conducting IT serurity verification reviews are
      contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.5 of the
      "DOC IT Management Handbook" and Section
      5 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

F.    Responsibilities and Process:                      

      Classified National Security IT Systems

      1.     The DOC Director for Information
             Resources Management is the DAA for all
             classified IT systems within the
             Department.  This authority can not be
             delegated below this level.  Accreditation
             will be granted only with the
             recommendations of the DOC Director,
             Office of Security, DOC Chief,
             Telecommunications Management Division
             and the DOC IT Security Manager.

      2.     The DOC IT Security Manager will act as
             the central point of contact for
             accreditation of classified IT systems and
             will evaluate the adequacy of all technical
             controls protecting these systems.  The
             DOC IT Security Manager will review all
             accreditation documentation, evaluate the
             security controls for the IT system and
             conduct on-site reviews, if necessary, to
             ensure they meet all applicable federal and
             DOC policies, regulations and standards
             and that they appear to be adequate and
             appropriate for protection of the system. 
             The DOC IT Security Manager will submit
             recommendations to the DAA for or
             against accreditation.  Recommendation
             should include any additional controls or
             constraints required to meet a satisfactory
             level of operational security.

      3.     The Chief, Telecommunications
             Management Division will evaluate all
             supporting accreditation documentation and
             conduct on-site inspections, when
             necessary, to ensure compliance with all
             Communications Security (COMSEC) and
             emanations (TEMPEST) security
             requirements as required by the Chapter 8
             of the "DOC IT Management Handbook."

      4.     The DOC Director, Office of Security will
             evaluate all supporting accreditation
             documentation and conduct on-site
             inspections, when necessary, to ensure
             compliance with appropriate national
             security directives and DAO 207-2, "DOC
             National Security Information Manual."  

      Unclassified Sensitive IT Systems 

      1.     The Senior Information Resources
             Management official in each operating unit
             will be the DAA for all sensitive systems
             within their organization.  This approval
             authority may only be delegated to a senior
             management official of a subordinate
             organizational unit, if that official does not
             have direct control over the IT system
             being accredited.  Delegation of
             accreditation authority must be requested
             and approved in advance by the DOC
             Director for Information Resources
             Management.    

      2.     The operating unit ITSO will act as the
             central point of contact for accreditation of
             all sensitive IT systems within the
             organization.  The ITSO will review all
             accreditation documentation, evaluate the
             security controls for the IT system and
             conduct on-site reviews, if necessary, to
             ensure they meet all applicable federal and
             DOC policies, regulations and standards
             and that they appear to be adequate and
             appropriate for protection of the system. 
             The ITSO will submit recommendations to
             the DAA for or against accreditation. 
             Recommendations should include any
             additional controls or constraints required
             to meet a satisfactory level of operational
             security.

             The operating unit ITSO will submit an
             accreditation status report quarterly to the
             DOC IT Security Manager, listing
             accredited systems by DOC identification
             numbers, including interim accreditations,
             and the completed date.  A copy of all
             official accreditation statements will be
             forwarded with this list.
  
      IT System Owners

      Chapter 10, Section 10.1 of the "DOC IT
      Management Handbook" and Section 1 of the
      "DOC IT Security Manual" contain specific
      information about designation of ownership of
      IT systems and data.  Owners of DOC IT
      systems will complete all required actions and
      prepare an accreditation package including all
      documentation identified in this section.  For
      classified IT systems, the accreditation package
      will be forwarded to the DOC IT Security
      Manager through the ITSO and the Senior
      Information Resources Management official for
      the operating unit.  Sensitive IT system
      accreditation packages will be forwarded to the
      appropriate ITSO for the operating unit.

      The information included in the accreditation
      package will contain details about the system,
      which may identify weaknesses or
      vulnerabilities which require protection against
      disclosure to persons without an official need
      to know.  Accreditation packages for sensitive
      systems will be marked at least "For Official
      Use Only."  Classified IT system accreditation
      packages will be marked in accordance with
      appropriate national security directives and
      DAO 207-2, "DOC National Security
      Information Manual."
      
      The following actions shall be completed and
      the appropriate documentation prepared and
      submitted in the accreditation package to the
      appropriate DAA for the IT system:

      Request for Accreditation

      The system owner will prepare a written
      request for approval to operate the IT system
      and forward the documentation listed below to
      the appropriate DAA.  The written request will
      include a certification statement that the IT
      system has undergone adequate tests to ensure
      that it meets all federal and DOC policies,
      regulations and standards and that all installed
      security safeguards appear to be adequate and
      appropriate for the sensitivity of the system.   



      Approved IT System Security Plan
      
      A detailed IT system security plan will be
      prepared by the system owner, in the required
      format provided in the "DOC Guidelines for
      Developing and Evaluating Security Plans for
      Sensitive and Classified Systems," contained in
      Section 2 of the "DOC IT Security Manual." 
      The purpose of the system security plan is to
      provide a basic overview of the security and
      privacy requirements of the subject system and
      the IT system owner's plan for meeting those
      requirements.  The plan may also be viewed as
      documentation of the structured process of
      planning adequate, cost-effective security
      protection for the system.  

      The IT system security plan must be forwarded
      through the operating unit's ITSO for review
      and comment, and once all corrective actions
      have been completed, to the DOC IT Security
      Manager for final approval.  A statement of
      approval will be sent to the operating unit
      ITSO for forwarding to the IT system owner. 
      Security plans must be reviewed by the system
      owner, at least annually, and changes
      submitted, as necessary, to ensure they are up-
      to-date.     
      
      Chapter 10, Section 10.2 of the "DOC IT
      Management Handbook" contains the DOC
      policy for IT system security plans.  Section 2
      of the "DOC IT Security Manual" contains
      detailed guidance for preparation of these
      plans.

      Completed Risk Analysis

      IT system owners are responsible for having a
      risk analysis conducted for each IT system to
      ensure that appropriate, cost effective
      safeguards are incorporated into existing and
      new systems.  A risk analysis will be
      conducted prior to approval of design
      specifications for new systems, when major
      changes occur to the system or every three
      years, whichever occurs first.  Examples of
      major system changes are given in Section E.,
      Reaccreditation, of this document.  

      See Chapter 10, Section 10.7 of the "DOC IT
      Management Handbook" and Section 7 of the
      "DOC IT Security Manual" for guidance on
      conducting the required risk analysis.

      Contingency/Disaster Recovery Plans

      Each IT system shall develop and maintain, in
      an up-to-date state, a contingency and disaster
      recovery plan which will provide reasonable
      assurance that critical data processing can be
      continued, or resumed quickly, if normal
      operations are interrupted.  The plan for large
      systems supporting essential Departmental or
      agency functions shall be fully documented and
      operationally tested at least annually.  Small
      systems may develop a more abbreviated and
      less formal plan.  Policy concerning
      contingency/disaster recovery planning is
      contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.8 of the
      "DOC IT Management Handbook" and Section
      8 of the "DOC IT Security Manual." 
      Additional guidance is contained in Section 7
      of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      Software Application Certification Statements

      Sensitive application software shall be
      thoroughly tested prior to implementation to
      verify that the user functions and the required
      administrative, technical, and physical
      safeguards are present and are effectively
      operating as intended. If the system to be
      accredited is running major applications
      requiring separate certification, system owners
      will provide copies of all software application
      certification and recertification statements as
      part of the accreditation package.  General
      support system owners running applications
      belonging to other organizations are not
      required to provide these certification
      statements.  

      Certification Testing of Security Controls

      Prior to accreditation, each IT system is to
      undergo appropriate technical evaluations to
      ensure that it meets all federal and DOC
      policies, regulations and standards and that all
      installed security safeguards appear to be
      adequate and appropriate for the sensitivity of
      the system.  The technical evaluation results
      are the basis for the system owner's
      certification statement in the accreditation
      request.  The letter should state what methods
      were used to perform the certification
      evaluation.  The DOC certification policy is
      contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.3 of the
      "DOC IT Management Handbook."  Section 3
      of the "DOC IT Security Manual contains two
      approved methodologies for conducting
      certification testing.   

      The following certification evaluation
      documentation will be included in the
      accreditation package, as applicable:

      1.     System Owner Certification Reports

             Include a copy of the certification review
             report that shows:  (1) that controls
             function properly; (2) that controls satisfy
             performance criteria and provide for
             availability, survivability and accuracy; and
             (3) that the controls cannot be easily
             broken or circumvented.  Copies of
             evaluation results should be included.

      2.     Other Internal Reviews

             The results of any security related reviews
             performed by evaluation teams internal to
             the operating unit or the system owner's
             organization may be used as part of the
             certification evaluation.  Copies of review
             findings and corrective actions should be
             included in the accreditation package.  

      3.     External Reviews

             The results of any audits performed by
             independent external organizations may
             also be used as part of the certification
             evaluation.  Copies of audit findings and
             corrective actions taken should be included
             in the accreditation package.

             For classified IT systems, external
             organizations such as Department of
             Defense, National Security Agency, State
             Department, Central Intelligence Agency,
             etc., who have specific requirements for
             data under their area of responsibility, may
             also perform reviews and inspections.  Any
             authorizations or approvals provided by
             these external organizations are important
             certification documentation and must be
             provided with the request for accreditation.


                                   ATTACHMENT 1

                          SAMPLE ACCREDITATION STATEMENTS

Full Accreditation:

I have carefully examined the accreditation
package documentation for DOC Information
Technology (IT) System Number ______, "ABC
Computer Center," dated ____________.  Based on
my authority and judgment, and weighing the
remaining residual risk against operational
requirements, I authorize (continued) operation of
this system (under the following restrictions).

                                  (restrictions)

I hereby accredit DOC IT System Number ______,
"ABC Computer Center," as an unclassified
sensitive system, for a period not to exceed three
years.  Should any major changes occur to this
system during this three year period, a re-
evaluation of the adequacy of its security controls
must be conducted and a reaccreditation requested.


                                
_____________________________________
                                DAA Signature and Date

Interim Accreditation:

I have carefully examined the accreditation
package documentation for DOC Information
Technology (IT) System Number ______, "ABC
Computer Center," dated __________.  Based on
my authority and judgment and the
recommendation of the (System Owner, ITSO or
DAA judgmentt) it does not appear that this system
has reached a satisfactory level of operational
security (or the following actions must be completed or additional controls
implemented prior to full accreditation).

                    (actions or additional controls required)  

I hereby grant an interim accreditation to DOC IT System Number ______, "ABC Computer
Center," for a period not to exceed six months to allow time to (take action or implement
additional controls required).  Prior to the expiration of this interim accreditation on
_______________, the accreditation package shall be resubmitted showing that a satisfactory
level of operational security has been reached.

                                ______________________________________
                                DAA Signature and Date
                                     SECTION 5
               INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY VERIFICATION REVIEWS

A.    Purpose:

      The purpose of this section is to establish Department of Commerce (DOC) policy for
      conducting information technology (IT) security verification reviews of the
      Department's sensitive and classified national security IT systems.  The purpose of the
      IT security verification review is to provide a level of review and evaluation
      independent of the system owner, that will verify that adequate and appropriate levels
      of protection are being provided for the individual systems, based on their unique
      protection requirements.

B.    Overview:

      Protection requirements for each of the individual IT systems within the Department
      will vary according to the unique characteristics of the system, environmental
      concerns, data sensitivity and mission related criticality of the system or data.  Total
      protection against all threats may be an unrealistic goal.  Appropriate levels of security
      must be determined by an evaluation of the threats, vulnerabilities and risk factors
      associated with each system.  Cost-effective controls that are adequate to achieve an
      acceptable level of risk for the individual system must then be implemented.

      System owners are responsible for completing all DOC and federal requirements for
      identifying their sensitive and classified systems, preparing security plans that provide
      a basic overview of the security and privacy requirements of the subject system and
      the system owner's plan for meeting those requirements, conducting risk assessments,
      implementing controls determined to be required and cost-effective, developing
      contingency and disaster recovery plans that will ensure availability of the system for
      mission accomplishment and completing all requirements for certification and
      accreditation of the system.  The IT security verification review process provides an
      independent means to ensure that the system owner has implemented adequate and
      appropriate levels of protection, based on the system's unique requirements.  The IT
      security verification review process is part of the Department's oversight program.

C.    Background and Authority:

      The DOC IT security verification review process is established in compliance with the
      "Computer Security Act of 1987," Public Law 100-235, OMB Circular A-130,
      Appendix III, "Security of Federal Automated Information Systems" and OMB
      Bulletin 90-08, "Guidance for Preparation of Security Plans for Federal Computer
      Systems that Contain Sensitive Information."


D.    Scope:

      The policy contained in this document covers all DOC IT resources that have been
      identified as either sensitive or classified national security systems whether maintained
      in-house or commercially.

E.    Policy:

      An IT security verification review will be conducted on all DOC sensitive or classified
      national security IT systems by an evaluation team under the direction of the DOC IT
      Security Manager or the operating unit ITSO or the ITSO of a subordinate
      organizational unit every three years.  The security plan for the system will be used as
      the foundation for the actual review.  The review will be conducted in accordance with
      the guidance contained in the "DOC Guidelines for Conducting IT Security
      Verification Reviews of Sensitive and Classified Systems," Attachment 2 to this
      document.

F.    Responsibilities and Process:

      IT Security Verification Review Team

      The IT security verification review team will always be under the direction of the
      DOC IT Security Manager or the IT Security Officer (ITSO) at the operating unit
      level or a major subordinate organizational unit.  This should assure the level of
      knowledge about the DOC IT security program requirements is adequate to make
      decisions about the appropriateness and adequacy of controls required for the system
      under review.  Whenever possible, these individuals should participate in the on-site
      review as the team leader.  When the ITSO is unable to participate in the actual
      review, they will appoint an individual who is judged to have sufficient knowledge
      about the DOC IT security program to act as the review team leader.  Additional team
      members should include personnel knowledgeable about physical and environmental
      security, personnel security, information security (if system processes classified
      national security information), application security, hardware and software,
      telecommunications, technical controls, procedural security, contingency and disaster
      recovery planning and risk management.  Personnel from the Internal Control Review
      area within the organization are also suggested as team members.  The actual number
      of team members may vary and should be limited to the smallest number possible to
      cover all areas of concern.  The average team will include two to four individuals, but
      should be comprised of no less than two people.

      Operating units may contract out for IT security verification reviews to be conducted
      by commercial consulting firms or other federal organizations.  However, care should
      be taken in preparing the procurement requests or agreements to ensure that the review
      will be conducted in accordance with all DOC policies and standards.  The operating
      unit ITSO will act as the COTR for the contract, provide all directions for conducting
      the review and set standards for written reports.

      The team leader will be responsible for notifying the system owner of the planned
      review, making specific review assignments to individual team members based on their
      expertise, coordinating activities of team members, conducting an in-briefing and an
      exit-briefing with the system owners, conducting team meetings as required, making
      decisions about what recommendations are appropriate for the individual system and
      preparation of the draft and final "IT Security Verification Review Report."  The
      format and guidance for preparing this report is contained in Attachment 1 of this
      document. 

      Conducting the Review
      
      Written notification should be sent to the system owner two to four weeks in advance
      of the review, providing information concerning the purpose of the review, dates of
      the review, list of review team members, requesting the assignment of a point of
      contact and that the following documentation be made available to the review team.

      1.     Memorandum officially designating an individual as the IT System Security
             Officer (ITSSO)

      2.     Listing of current personnel (indicate working hours for ADP personnel)

      3.     Hours of operation of facility

      4.     Organization charts for highlighting the placement of the individual facilities

      5.     Applicable floor plans (including building floor plans)

      6.     Latest risk analyses for the system

      7.     Reports of external and internal security (both ADP and other) evaluations
             completed during the 3 years

      8.     Hardware inventory (to include minis and micros)

      9.     Software inventory (include production programs, utility programs,
             commercially available software, operating systems, etc.)

      10.    List of users:

             a.    within the Department
             b.    at other federal agencies
             c.    others

      11.    Disaster recovery plans

      12.    Policies, directives, guidelines, etc., pertaining to IT  security issued by local
             authorities

      13.    Minutes of any management meetings that address IT security

      14.    Any other documentation pertaining to IT security

      15.    Information pertaining to IT security awareness and training including course
             content, type of training and number of personnel who have completed or are
             scheduled for training

      16.    Information pertaining to ADP-related position sensitivity and personnel
             screening for facility

      17.    Copies of any contracts for operation and maintenance or other service
             agreements related to this system

      18.    Reports of any internal IT security reviews that may have been conducted

      19.    Reports of any Internal Control Reviews or any reviews conducted by other
             external or internal organizations

      20.    Discussion of any known needs for guidance or assistance or specific areas of
             concern in IT security from either the operating unit, Department or federal
             levels

      21.    Sensitive System Security Plan

      22.    Certification documentation, if available

      The system owner should appoint an individual, usually the ITSSO, to act as the point
      of contact for the review team.  This individual should participate as an observer in
      the review and coordinate interviews or make other arrangements as necessary to assist
      the review team.  An entrance meeting should be arranged to allow the review team to
      explain its mission and review methods to the system owner and staff members. 
      During the course of the review, the team will discuss their findings and
      recommendations with the point of contact or system owner and keep them advised
      about the progress of the review.

      The security plan for the system will be used as the foundation for the actual review. 
      The security plan will provide information about the technical and physical system, its
      sensitivity level and its protection requirements.  The security plan is intended as a
      basic overview and will not contain the level of detailed information that the review
      team will need in making decisions about its actual security requirements.  However,
      the plan should be accurate and reflect the actual system description, protection
      requirements and controls in place,  Verification of the accuracy of the plan is an
      important element of the review process.  Recommendations to improve the quality of
      the security plan should be made during the course of the review.  In many cases, the
      review team may find that many of their recommendations will concern changes to the
      security plan and not to the actual system controls.

      Prior to the actual on-site review of the system, all team members should be provided
      with a copy of the security plan for the system to be reviewed.  The team should meet
      to discuss the scope of the review, which will be determined by the size, sensitivity
      level, type and complexity of the system as identified in Section I. through Section
      III.B. in the security plan.  During the actual on-site review, it is recommended that
      the team leader be the evaluator to verify the information contained in these sections
      of the plan.  The team leader should share the results of the verification with all other
      team members to ensure that their reviews are based on accurate requirements for the
      system.  Although it is not necessary for all team members to be experts about what
      controls are appropriate for every type system, they should be given enough guidance
      about the system under review to avoid wasting too much time asking questions that
      are not relevant for the particular system.  A very obvious example of this would be if
      the system under review is a microcomputer or local area network system, asking
      questions relating to a computer room would not be relevant.  A less obvious example
      would be for a system that contains nothing but public information, asking multiple
      questions about confidentiality controls would be a waste of time and might lead to
      inappropriate recommendations.  Other considerations that would have a bearing on
      determining adequate and appropriate protection requirements for a specific system
      would include the physical location, environment, category of system,
      telecommunication configuration, sensitivity of data, availability requirements and
      importance to mission accomplishment.

      It is important to understand that the IT security verification review is not intended to
      be a risk analysis.  Testing of actual controls will be limited to only those necessary to
      verify their existence and proper operation.  If documentation of prior testing of
      controls appears adequate (i.e., risk analysis or system certification documentation)
      then further testing would not be conducted.  Appropriate tests might include such
      things as: (1) having system owner demonstrate access controls on the system (i.e.,
      logging into the system to ensure password is blanked, attempting to establish
      passwords outside established password constraints, viewing SCREEN WARNING
      messages, attempting to access files that should be restricted, etc.); (2) attempting to
      access computer room outside normal working hours to ensure doors are locked or
      verifying that visitors are challenged.  Evaluators are not to attempt penetration of the
      computer or to remove any system resources (i.e., equipment, media or printed output,
      etc.), as these actions could be considered security violations.

      At the conclusion of the review, the "IT Security Verification Review Report" will be
      prepared in the format outlined in Attachment 1 of this document.  A copy of the draft
      report with major findings and recommendations should be provided to the system
      owner during the exit-briefing.  Within two weeks after the conclusion of the review,
      the system owner should provide the review team leader written comments or
      questions about the draft report findings and recommendations.  The review team
      should consider the system owner's concerns and prepare and forward the final report
      for the system owner's action. 

      The information included in the "IT Security Verification Review Report" will contain
      details about the system, which may identify weaknesses or vulnerabilities which
      require protection against disclosure to persons without an official need to know. 
      Reports for sensitive systems will be marked at least "For Official Use Only." 
      Classified IT system reports will be marked in accordance with appropriate national
      security directives and DAO 207-2, "DOC National Security Information Manual."

      Use of the "IT Security Verification Review Guideline"

      The guideline, contained in Attachment 2, provides a structured process for
      accomplishment of the required IT security verification review for DOC IT systems. 
      It was developed following the format required for DOC IT system security plans and
      provides detailed questions for each section contained in the plans.  Since the purpose
      of the IT security verification review is to determine if the individual IT system has
      been provided with adequate and appropriate levels of protection based on its unique
      protection requirements, many of the questions under specific control areas will not
      apply to all IT systems.

      An attempt has been made in developing the "IT Security Verification Review
      Guideline" to formulate questions that cover the majority of possible security concerns
      and requirements that could possibly apply to any DOC sensitive or classified IT
      system.  The questions are not intended to be all inclusive, and answers provided may
      generate other questions.  Additional questions may also result from the review of
      system documentation and records or as the result of interviews or observations by the
      team members.  Team members will be required to rely on their judgement about what
      is appropriate and adequate protection requirements for the system they are evaluating. 
      The guideline questions should be reviewed by the evaluator in advance of any
      interviews and those determine not be applicable, marked off.  The team leader should
      be able to assist in determining the appropriate questions or areas to be reviewed.

      System Owners

      System owners may also find this guideline helpful in performing management control
      reviews and the required risk analysis or certification testing of their systems.  The
      guideline contains extensive questions about all categories of controls and could be
      useful in verifying that adequate consideration of appropriate controls has been
      included in their risk analysis, certification methodologies or for management control
      review ideas.  It may also serve as a useful tool in identifying additional controls that
      would be appropriate for their systems.
                                   ATTACHMENT 1

                         INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY 
                         VERIFICATION REVIEW REPORT FORMAT

Format

The "Information Technology (IT) Security Verification Review Reports" should be consistent
across all DOC organizations and should contain the following sections:

      Cover page  

      Executive Summary
             Introduction

      Discussion
             Objective
             Method

      System and Sensitivity Information
             System Description/Purpose
             System Environment and Special Considerations
             General Description of Information Sensitivity

      Recommendations

The following sample report was prepared in the appropriate format and contains guidance for
content in each section.
                   



                         (ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING REVIEW) 

                      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY REVIEW


                            DOC SYSTEM NUMBER         
                                 (OPERATING UNIT)
                                (SUB ORGANIZATION)

                                (SYSTEM NAME/TITLE)
                                         

                       (CITY, STATE WHERE SYSTEM IS LOCATED)














                                   (MONTH, YEAR)



                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


Introduction

An Information Technology (IT) Security Verification Review, in conformance with the
requirements of the Computer Security Act of 1987 and Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) Bulletin 90-08, was conducted during the period                   at the (Operating Unit,
Sub-organization, System Name/Title, in City, State.)

The IT Security Review Team was lead by                           , (Organization and Title). 
(List all other team members by name, organization and title) team members.  Each team
member was assigned specific sections of the Sensitive System Security Plan for the         
system, to verify and validate the accuracy of the information contained in the plan and to
ensure that the system controls were adequate and appropriate for the system.  The review
was conducted in accordance with guidance contained in the "DOC Guidelines for Conducting
Information Technology Security Verification Reviews of Sensitive and Classified Systems".

The IT Security Review was conducted on the DOC IT System Number        , "(Name/Title
of System)".  The system (describe in general terms the purpose of the system.  See Section
I.E. in the security plan.) 

The overall IT security profile of this system was (excellent, very good, good, adequate,
inadequate or poor).  This paragraph should contain summary information about the findings,
including positive actions, controls or other significant items that the system owner has
implemented to protect the system.  Any major problems noted during the course of the
review should be described in general terms or "no major problem were noted". 
Recommendations primarily concerned (describe in general categories (i.e., improvements in
administrative procedures, documentation, contingency planning, backup storage, personnel
management and user access control).) 

The purpose of this review was to improve IT security specifically and IT resource
management in general at (system name) and to ensure compliance with prescribed IT security
policies and regulations and to identify areas where further security controls may be necessary
to improve the protection of the system.

At the conclusion of the on-site visit, the review team discussed its preliminary findings with
the (system) management and IT security staff personnel who indicated general agreement and
a willingness to implement all recommendations (or major objections).  Implementation of the
recommendations will provide assurance that all risks have been identified and appropriate
levels of security exist for protection of the system. 

                                    DISCUSSION

Objective

The objectives of this review were to determine the coordination and implementation of
activities conducted by the (system organization) to ensure the protection and integrity of
information resources such as development of security plans for sensitive and classified
systems, ensuring periodic risk assessments are conducted, establishing contingency and
disaster recovery plans, implementing a security awareness and training program, performing
IT security reviews, and certification and accreditation of sensitive systems.

Specific laws, regulations and policies used as guidelines for this review, included:

      OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, "Security of Federal Automated Information
      Systems"

      Public Law 100-235, the "Computer Security Act of 1987"

      Department of Commerce, "Information Technology Handbook, Chapter 10,
      Information Technology Security"

      OMB Bulletin 90-08, "Guidance for Preparation of Security Plans for Federal
      Computer Systems that Contain Sensitive Information"

      Department of Commerce, "Guidelines for Conducting Information Technology
      Security Verification Reviews of Sensitive and Classified Systems"

This review was conducted to evaluate compliance with federal and Departmental IT security
policies and requirements and assess the system's IT security profile.  Review criteria was
based on evaluation of the in-place and planned controls identified in the Sensitive System
Security Plan for this system (DOC System Number        ).

Method

The review team's approach in this evaluation was to interview (system name/title)
management and staff personnel, observe operations of the system and the physical facilities
and resources within the buildings and review all IT security program related documentation. 
The primary point-of-contact for this system review was (Name and title).   Other Staff
members contacted during the review included: (List names and titles).  


During the entrance interview with system management and staff personnel, the review team's
mission and methods were explained in detail.
                        SYSTEM AND SENSITIVITY INFORMATION


SYSTEM DESCRIPTION/PURPOSE

(Copy information contained in Section I.E. of the security plan or correct information after
the conclusion of the review.) 

SYSTEM ENVIRONMENT AND SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

(Copy information contained in Section I.F. of the security plan or correct information after
the conclusion of the review.)

GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF INFORMATION SENSITIVITY

(Copy information contained in Section II.B. of the security plan or correct information after
the conclusion of the review.)                                  RECOMMENDATIONS


The review was conducted, using the "DOC Guidelines for Conducting Information
Technology Security Verification Reviews of Sensitive and Classified Systems" and the
"Sensitive System Security Plan" for DOC System        , as the basis.  The review included
on-site inspections of the facilities, computer room environment, hardware configuration, and
interviews of management and computer center personnel The following recommendations are
a result of the review findings:

The security plan for this system should be updated to incorporate any changes resulting from
these recommendations. 

            Recommendations should be numbered.

            Recommendations should be listed by security plan section number. Example
             Section III.C.2.b.  This will relate each finding and recommendation to a
             specific control category.  There may be multiple separate recommendations
             under a specific section number.

            Each finding and recommendation should be discussed with the system owner
             during the exit briefing in as much detail as possible by the review team
             member making the recommendation.  Every effort should be made to discuss
             findings with the point of contact or system owner prior to the exit briefing. 
             This will ensure that all significant facts have been taken into consideration
             about any unique situations or requirements affecting the individual system. 
             Discussion about security requirements during the course of the review also
             provides an excellent opportunity to increase IT security awareness and
             training. 
                                     SECTION 6.1
                                MALICIOUS SOFTWARE


A.    Purpose:     

      The purpose or this section is to establish Department of Commerce (DOC) policy to
      minimize the risk of introducing malicious software into computer systems.  It also
      provides guidelines for the detection and removal of malicious software from
      information technology (IT) systems.

B.    Overview:    

      Malicious software presents an increasingly serious security problem for computer
      systems and networks. Malicious software includes viruses and other destructive
      programs, such as Trojan horses and network worms.  This type or software is often
      written as independent programs that appear to provide useful functions but also
      contain malicious programs that can be very destructive.  It can be quickly spread
      through software bulletin boards, shareware, and users unknowingly copying and
      sharing these programs in an unauthorized manner.  It can also be spread by users
      sharing data files and software products. Networks are particularly vulnerable as they
      allow very rapid spread of the virus to all systems connected to the network. 

      A program that is infected with a virus can infect any host in which the program is
      used.  Because of the insidious nature or a virus, any user may become an unwitting
      propagator.  Commerce's dependence on networked computer systems, personal
      computers (PCs), and office automation makes us susceptible to virus "attacks."

      Computer viruses have become a threat to virtually everyone using a computer.  A
      virus can destroy programs and data by copying itself to other programs.  It is then
      executed when the infected program is run.  It can disable computers and entire
      computer networks.  It can also cause lost computer time and staff resources to track
      and eliminate it. 

      Most operating units within the Department have been infected with different
      computer viruses.  In many cases, data was not lost but time and staff resources were
      wasted tracking and eliminating these viruses. 

      PCs are more susceptible to viruses than other types of computers due to their
      widespread use.  However, viruses can be created for any type of computer. 
      Malicious programs such as Trojan horses and trap doors were originally written for
      mainframe computer systems.  Introduction of malicious programs into these larger
      systems is usually caused by unauthorized users accessing a system without adequate
      controls or by authorized users making unauthorized use of the system. 

      Sound IT security procedures will help detect and prevent computer viruses and other
      malicious programs from spreading or causing damage.  The guidelines contained in
      this document can be adapted for any type of computer system. 

C.    Background and Authority:

      Due to the widespread threat from computer viruses to all organizations, both private
      sector and government, it has become necessary to implement specific measures
      designed to reduce this threat and the potential damage caused by virus infections to
      DOC IT systems.  The DOC malicious software policy is established in compliance
      with the "Computer Security Act of 1987," Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
      Circular A-130, and the "Computer Fraud and Abuse Act", Public Laws 98-473 and
      99-474, 18 U.S.Code 1030. 

D.    Scope:       

      This policy covers all IT systems that are used to process Commerce data, including
      contractor-owned and/or contractor-operated systems. 

      This policy applies to all employees, personnel from other organizations, contractor
      personnel, and vendors using Commerce systems participating in DOC sponsored
      software development, software demonstrations, and the operation and maintenance of
      IT systems.

E.    Policy:      

      All DOC organizations will establish and implement a process and procedures to
      minimize the risk of introducing viruses and other malicious software, to ensure timely
      detection of viral infections, to provide procedures for eliminating viral infections from
      the Department's inventory of microcomputers (PCs), and to provide procedures to
      minimize the risk from malicious programs to larger systems, or systems where virus
      detection software is not yet available. 

F.    Responsibilities and Process:   

      Responsibilities

     The Director for Information Resources Management is responsible for the
     Department's IT security program.  This includes establishing IT security policies and
     procedures for safeguarding Departmental IT resources.  

     The Departmental IT Security Manager shall serve as the central point of contact for all
     matters relating to IT security for the Department and will be responsible for developing
     a process for disseminating information concerning the potential dangers from, and
     guidelines for control of, malicious software. 

     Operating unit IT Security Officers (ITSO) are responsible for:

     1.  Developing appropriate procedures and issuing instructions for the prevention,
         detection, and removal or malicious software consistent with the guidelines
         contained herein;

     2.  Ensuring all personnel within the operating unit are made aware of this policy and
         incorporating it into IT security briefings and training programs;

     3.  Identifying and recommending software packages for the detection and removal of
         malicious software;

     4.  Developing a system for users to report computer viruses and other incidents and
         then notifying potentially affected parties of the possible threat;

     5.  Promptly notifying the Departmental IT Security Manager of all IT security
         incidents including malicious software;

     6.  Providing assistance in determining the source of malicious software and the extent
         of contamination;

     7.  Providing assistance for the removal of malicious  software; and

     8.  Conducting periodic reviews to ensure that proper security procedures are followed,
         including those designed to protect against malicious software. 

     Managers must ensure that employees and contractors follow operating unit procedures
     which comply with this policy.

     Employees, personnel from other organizations using DOC systems, contractor
     personnel, and vendors are responsible for following operating unit procedures for the
     protection of IT resources to which they  have access.  This includes reporting IT
     security incidents, involving viruses and other malicious software to their manager or
     supervisor and the ITSO for their organization.

     Requirements

     The requirements defined in this section, when implemented, will minimize the risk
     from introduction of viruses and other malicious software to DOC IT systems and
     networks.  Not all requirements listed will apply to every IT system or network.  Each
     organization must consciously evaluate the appropriateness of each of the following
     policies and implement those that apply to the category for their particular system.
  
     1.  Procedures.  Each operating unit will establish appropriate procedures for adherence
         to this policy based on the criticality, sensitivity, and risks to their IT systems.  

         Until virus detection software becomes available for all types of IT  systems,
         the best protection against malicious software attacks is to establish good IT
         security procedures to control access to and actions taken on the IT system.

     2.  Backing up software and data.  Employees should back up new software
         immediately, retaining the original distribution diskettes in a safe and secure
         location.  Write-protect original diskettes prior to making back-up copies.  If a
         virus destroys the working copy, the original software is still available. 
         Copying copyrighted software material without the vendor's consent is illegal. 
         If a vendor has not provided pre-approval of backup copies, employees must
         have vendor approval to create additional copies.  Use only newly-formatted
         diskettes for copying software for backup storage.  Used disks may already
         contain malicious programs which would contaminate the backup copies. 

         Data files should be backed up frequently and stored off-site or in a secured
         environment.

         Restore damaged software programs from the original diskettes, not from
         regular backups.  A virus may have been introduced prior to backup.
 
     3.  Outgoing software.  A serious impact on the credibility of the Department
         would result from being identified as the source of a virus.  Therefore, all
         software and data leaving the Department must be checked for viruses or other
         malicious coding.

         Use only new media for making copies for distribution.  Where possible, use
         a stand-alone computer system when preparing copies for distribution.

         PC systems to which access is somewhat open, (i.e., training rooms or user
         laboratories, etc.) should never be used as a source of software or files to be
         transmitted and/or copied for distribution, without first taking steps to ensure
         that the system is free from viruses or other malicious software.

     4.  Software.  All PC machine-readable media will be scanned for malicious software
         before initial use.  Follow all vendor instructions carefully and write-protect virus
         scanning software media prior to use.  Scanning software can become contaminated
         in the same way as other software.  Although software sealed in "shrink-wrapped"
         plastic is usually checked by vendors, it is still advisable to scan this software since
         there have been reported cases in the Department of software contamination.  Write-
         protect software prior to scanning to prevent possible contamination from system
         and virus scan software being used.

         Several reputable software packages are available to detect and/or remove viruses
         from machine-readable media.  There are also utilities that can search text files for
         virus signatures.  Most packages are designed for PC systems and local area
         networks, but may not be adequate for all PC operating systems.  There are very
         few available for larger systems.    
     
         Requirements to scan for malicious software are to be implemented as soon as
         the tools become available for a particular combination of hardware and
         software. 
     
         Establish controls for local area networks that prevent anyone except the system
         administrator or other authorized staff from loading software on file servers.  Ensure
         that operating system files and other executable files are read-only.  If possible,
         disable the network mail facility from transferring executable files.  This will help
         prevent network worm programs from spreading through the network.

         Trojan horses and other similar malicious software programs are most often
         introduced by insiders and it is not unusual for larger systems to be the target. 
         The best protection against attacks of this type are to establish good
         management procedures.  Effective controls include separation of duties,
         limiting individual access and allowed actions to what is needed and no more,
         formal change control and configuration management procedures, separation
         and testing of development versus production software and control over
         installation of new software versions.  Frequent backups of the system and
         data will allow recovery should an incident occur.

     5.  Authorized software.  It is imperative that machine-readable software and data files
         be obtained from reliable sources.  Viruses are often spread through free or shared
         programs, games, demonstration programs, and programs downloaded from bulletin
         boards.  Employees must not use privately-owned software or take software from
         their office without management approval.  Commercial software must be obtained
         through appropriate procurement channels.  In-house developed software must be
         done in accordance with established policy within the operating unit and have prior
         management approval.

         Shareware and freeware software must be obtained only with prior
         management approval.  Software obtained electronically from bulletin boards
         should be downloaded to newly formatted diskettes and not directly to the
         computer hard disk.  All newly acquired software, regardless of source, is
         subject to the scanning requirements in sub-paragraph 4 above.

     6.  Employee demonstrations.  When possible, employees demonstrating DOC products
         must be certain that the hardware and software they are using are free of viruses. 
         Use hardware write-protection mechanisms (i.e., read-only diskettes with write tabs;
         write-protect rings for tapes; knock-out rings on cassettes, etc.) to avoid any virus
         from infecting the media.  If possible, check the hardware for viruses before loading
         the demonstration software.  Do not allow other software to be used until the
         demonstration is completed.

     7.  Passwords.  For larger systems and networks, user identification and passwords are
         the primary protection mechanism against malicious software.  If the would-be
         perpetrators cannot get into the system, they cannot put malicious software on the
         system.  When possible, all IT systems that are shared resources, including local
         area networks and multi-user stand-alone systems shall implement a user
         identification and verification system, such as a USERID and password. 
         Conformance to the requirements of Chapter 10, Section 10.16 of the "DOC IT
         Management Handbook," and Section 16 of the "DOC IT Security Manual" in
         establishment, structure, individual accountability, periodic changing and removal
         are required.

         Log files should be reviewed periodically to detect unusual activity.  Terminals,
         workstations and networked PCs should never be left unattended when logged in.

     8.  Vendor demonstrations.  Vendors will demonstrate their software on stand-alone
         hardware, where possible.  An employee must scan the stand-alone hardware before
         it is used by the vendor to verify that the computer does not contain any viruses. 
         This shows the Department acted in good faith to prevent infecting the vendor's
         software.

         An employee will scan the stand-alone hardware when the demonstration is
         completed to determine if the vendor software contains a virus and remove it
         from the system.  The vendor should be notified immediately to prevent
         further infections.

         In the case of network software demonstrations, the system administrator must
         approve and coordinate the demonstrations.

         Written certification from the vendor that the demonstration software has been
         checked and is free from viruses, should be obtained prior to loading any
         vendor software.
 
     9.  Hardware.  PC hard disk drives, network file servers and other media which will be
         used to handle departmental information will be formatted between the time they
         are received and put into use.  There have been cases of formatted hard disk drives
         being received that contained viruses.  This requirement also applies to replacement
         parts resulting from repair and maintenance of equipment.  This requirement may be
         waived only if the vendor installing the software provides a written certification that
         the system and software have been checked and are virus free.

         Never start up (boot) your computer from a diskette unless it is the original
         write-protected system master or a trusted copy.

         Portable computer systems, such as laptops, that leave Department controlled
         areas must be scanned for viruses before and after connecting to systems or
         software owned by other organizations.

         Never use a local area network file server as a workstation.  File servers
         should be located in areas where access is restricted during working hours and
         locked after hours.

         When available and cost effective, virus detection software capable of
         continuous monitoring and reporting malicious programs, should be installed
         on hard disks to prevent contamination.

         Periodic scans of hard disks, using virus detection software, should be
         performed for systems without this protection installed.

         Lock computers and terminals or disconnect keyboards and store in a secure
         location, when not in use, to prevent unauthorized access.  Lock doors to
         areas containing computers and terminals.

     10. Procurement requirement.  All procurements for computer software and
         hardware will contain a requirement that the vendor have antiviral procedures in
         place to ensure that the media supplied is uncontaminated by malicious
         software.  In the case of small, off-the-shelf procurements where it is not
         possible to write antiviral clauses, the software will be scanned with virus
         detection software prior to use.  Procurements for PC system maintenance
         should also require antiviral procedures on the part of the contractor.

         Vendors depend on the reputation of their products to ensure future sales. 
         Reputable vendors are concerned about correcting any flaws in their systems
         or products that would make them vulnerable to attack from viruses or other
         malicious software, and on occasion issue recommended changes to improve
         security of their products.  System administrators and managers are to
         implement any vendor recommended changes, or security fixes as soon as
         possible, after official receipt.

     Malicious Software Indicators

     If your IT system seems to be acting different than usual, a malicious software incident
     may have occurred.  Below are a few signs that may indicate that a system has been
     infected.
 
     1.  Any unexplained messages or graphics on the screen,

     2.  An increase in the time required to load or execute programs,

     3.  An increase in the time required for disk accesses or processing from disk,

     4.  Unusual error messages,

     5.  Programs or files mysteriously disappearing,

     6.  Less memory available than usual,

     7.  Executable files changing size for no apparent reason,

     8.  Accesses made to non-referenced devices,

     9.  Data consistently out of balance,

     10. File date and time stamps changing for no apparent reason,

     11. Obsolete user accounts in use, 

     12. The presence of unexplained hidden files and/or

     13. Unusual network activity.

     If your system demonstrates any of the above, it could indicate that malicious software
     is present. 


     Elimination, Recovery and Reporting

     If you suspect that your IT system or network has been attacked by a virus or other
     malicious software program, do not attempt to fix the problems, but immediately report
     it to your supervisor and the ITSO for your operating unit.  They will determine the
     appropriate action to control the damage and report the incident to the DOC IT Security
     Manager.  It is important that the particular virus or other malicious software program,
     source, and potential for proliferation be identified and controlled.

     The initial report to the DOC IT Security Manager should be made within 24 hours of
     the incident.  This report may be verbal and should include the following information:

         Date and time of incident
         Location
         Equipment type, make and model
         Malicious software type
         Method of discovery
         Virus name (if known)
         DOC system number (if known)
         Source of malicious software (if known)
         Apparent effect

     Within ten working days of the incident, a written report will be prepared and sent to
     the DOC IT Security Manager of the incident by the operating unit ITSO.  This report
     will include the following along with all of the above information:

         Impact on operation
         Severity, including hours devoted to recovery and any additional costs incurred 
         Proliferation, number of machines or media infected
         Action taken - how malicious software was cleared, who was notified, including
            outside organizations, and what steps were taken to identify the source

     If the problem has not been resolved within ten working days, mark the written report
     "Interim" and prepare and forward a "Final" report when the incident is resolved.  In
     cases where resolution is not possible within 30 days, a written status report describing
     the actions taken and planned to resolve the incident must be sent to the DOC IT
     Security Manager monthly.

G.   Definitions:

     Introduction of viruses and other malicious software programs has generated a whole set
     of new terms.  The following list of definitions is provided to familiarize personnel with
     some of these terms.
  
     1.  Bacterium.  A late bloomer in the infectious terminology jargon is a "bacterium."  It
         is a program that replicates itself and becomes a parasite on the host system by
         preempting processor and memory capacity.

     2.  Computer virus.  A program that "infects" computer systems in much the same way
         as a biological virus infects humans.  The typical virus "reproduces" by making
         copies of itself and inserting them into other programs--either in systems software
         or in application programs. 
     
     3.  Flying Dutchman.  A feature of Trojan horse malicious programs that erases all
         traces of the programming codes from the computer's memory and eludes any
         detection.

     4.  Logic Bomb.  A computer code that is preset to cause a later malfunction when
         a specified set of logical conditions occur.  For example, a specific social
         security number in a payroll system is processed and the logic bomb is
         activated, causing an improper amount of money to be printed on the check.

     5.  Machine-readable media.  Media that can convey data to a given sensing device,
         e.g., diskettes, disks, tapes, computer memory.

     6.  Malicious Software.  Any of a family of computer programs developed with the
         sole purpose of doing harm.  Malicious code is usually embedded in software
         programs that appear to provide useful functions but, when activated by a user,
         cause undesirable results.

     7.  Scan.  To examine computer coding/programs sequentially, part by part.  For
         viruses, scans are made for virus signatures or potentially unsafe practices. (e.g.,
         changes to an executable file, direct writes to specific disk sectors, et al.).

     8.  Time Bomb.  Computer code that is preset to cause a later malfunction after a
         specific date, time or a specific number of operations.  The "Friday the 13th"
         computer virus is an example.  This virus infects the system several days or
         even months before and lies dormant until the date reaches Friday the 13th.

     9.  Trap Door.  A set of instruction codes embedded in a computer operating
         system that permits access while bypassing security controls.

     10.  Trojan Horse.  A program that causes unexpected (and usually undesirable) effects
          when willingly installed or run by an unsuspecting user.  A person can either
          create or gain access to the source code of a common, frequently used program
          and then add code so that the program performs a harmful function in addition to
          its normal function.  These programs are generally deeply buried in the code of the
          target program, lie dormant for a preselected period, and are triggered in the same
          manner as a logic bomb.  A Trojan horse can alter, destroy, or disclose data or
          delete files.

     11.  Virus detection software.  Software written to scan machine-readable media
          on computer systems.  There are a growing number of reputable software
          packages available that are designed to detect and/or remove viruses.  In
          addition, many utility programs can search text files for virus signatures or
          potentially unsafe practices. 

     12.  Virus signature.  A unique set of characters which identify a particular virus.  This
          may also be referred to as a virus marker.

     13.  Worm.  A worm is a complete program that propagates itself from system to
          system, usually through a network or other communication facility.  A worm is
          similar to a virus--it is able to infect other systems and programs.  A worm differs
          from a virus in that a virus replicates itself, which a worm does not.  A worm
          copies itself to a person's workstation over a network or through a host computer
          and then spreads to other workstations.  It can easily take over a network as the
          "Internet" worm did.  Unlike a Trojan horse, a worm enters a system uninvited.

H.   References:

     Viruses and other malicious software appear to be a growing problem with new strains
     of viruses appearing continuously.  Users of IT systems should become as familiar with
     the subject as possible, in order to protect against this threat.  The following documents
     published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology are good sources of
     additional information:

          John Wack and Lisa Carnahan, Computer Viruses and Related Threats: A
          Management Guide, NIST Special Publication 500-166, August 1989.

          Dennis Steinauer, Security of Personal Computer Systems: A Management
          Guide, NBS Special Publication 500-120, January 1985.

          An Abbreviated Bibliography for Computer Viruses and Related Security
          Issues, NIST, Revised April 18, 1990.
                                     SECTION 4
                                   ACCREDITATION

A.   Purpose:      

     The purpose of this section is to establish Department of Commerce (DOC) policy for
     accreditation of all unclassified sensitive and classified national security Information
     Technology (IT) systems.  

B.   Overview:     

     Accreditation is the authorization and approval, granted to a sensitive or classified IT
     system to process, as an acceptable risk, in an operational environment.  Accreditation
     is made on the basis of recommendations from a technical certification evaluation that
     the IT system meets all applicable federal and DOC policies, regulations, and standards
     and that all installed security safeguards appear to be adequate and appropriate for the
     sensitivity of the system; that they are operating correctly; or, that the system must be
     operated under certain specified conditions or constraints. 

C.   Background and Authority:  

     Accreditation is a requirement of Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular
     Number A-130 and the "Computer Security Act of 1987," Public Law 100-235.

D.   Scope: 

     The policy contained in this document covers all DOC IT systems, whether maintained
     in-house or commercially.

     Accreditation is required for all sensitive and classified DOC General Support and
     Application systems.  New IT systems or those not fully operational shall complete all
     requirements and be accredited prior to full implementation.

E.   Policy:

     This policy defines the final step in the IT Security management process that ensures
     protection of the vital IT resources within the Department.  

     Initial Accreditation

     All sensitive and classified DOC IT General Support or Application systems will be
     accredited.  The term accreditation describes the process whereby information pertaining
     to the security of a system is developed, analyzed and submitted for approval to the
     appropriate senior management official identified in this document as the Designated
     Approving Authority (DAA).  Section F, of this document, identifies the required steps
     in the accreditation process.  The DAA will review the accreditation support
     documentation and either concur, thereby declaring that a satisfactory level of
     operational security is present or not concur, indicating that the level of risk either has
     not been adequately defined or reduced to an acceptable level for operational
     requirements.  The DAA will sign a formal accreditation statement declaring that the
     system appears to be operating at an acceptable level of risk, or defining any conditions
     or constraints that are required for appropriate system protection.  Sample accreditation
     statements are contained in Attachment 1 of this document.

     Security of classified IT systems operated by, or in support of DOC programs is the
     responsibility of the Department and these systems must be accredited in accordance
     with the requirements defined in this policy.  Approvals granted by external agencies,
     i.e., Department of State, Department of Defense, Central Intelligence Agency, etc., are
     not valid authority to operate classified IT systems within the Department.  Approvals
     granted to these systems by DOC, prior to this policy, are no longer in effect and new
     approval to operate must be granted through the DOC accreditation process.        

     Interim Accreditation

     Interim authority to operate can be granted for a fixed period of time, not to exceed one
     year.  This authority is based on an approved security plan and is contingent on certain
     conditions being met.  The interim authority to operate, while continuing the
     accreditation process, permits the IT system to meet its operational mission
     requirements while improving its IT security posture.  If the DAA is not satisfied that
     the IT system is protected at an acceptable level of risk, an interim accreditation can be
     granted to allow time for implementation of additional controls.  Recommendation or
     request for an interim accreditation may be made by the IT system owner, the operating
     unit IT Security Officer (ITSO) or the DAA.  Interim authority to operate is not a
     waiver of the requirement for accreditation.  The IT system must meet all requirements
     and be fully accredited by the interim accreditation expiration date.  No extensions of
     interim accreditation can be granted except by the DOC Director for Information
     Resources Management. 

     Reaccreditation

     Systems will be reaccredited when major changes occur to the system or every three
     years, whichever occurs first.  Examples of major changes include:

     1.   Changes in the system or software applications - Substantial changes which alter
          the mission, operating environment or basic vulnerabilities of the system. Increase
          or decrease in hardware, application programs, external users, hardware upgrades,
          addition of telecommunications capability, dial-in lines, changes to program logic
          of application systems, relocation of system to new physical environment or new
          organization.  Minor changes such as, replacement of similar hardware when
          capacity does not significantly change, addition of two or three workstations on a
          network or small modifications to an application program (e.g., table headings are
          changed) would not require reaccreditation.

     2.   Changes in protection requirements - Changes in the sensitivity or classification
          level of the data being processed, increase in the mission criticality of the system
          or changes in federal or DOC policies.

     3.   Occurrence of a significant violation - A violation or incident that calls into
          question the adequacy of the system security controls.

     4.   Audit or evaluation findings - Findings from any security review that identifies
          significant unprotected risks.  These could include the system security verification
          review, physical or information security inspection, internal control reviews, Office
          of the Inspector General (OIG) audits or General Accounting Office (GAO) audits.

     Prior to reaccreditation, an on-site IT security verification review must be conducted by
     an evaluation team under the direction of the DOC IT Security Manager, the operating
     unit ITSO or the ITSO of a subordinate organizational unit (i.e., Line Office, Regional
     Office, Laboratory, etc.)  The IT security verification review team may not be under the
     direction of personnel from the subordinate organization having direct control over the
     IT system being evaluated.  The IT System Security Officer (ITSSO) for the system
     under review should participate as a member of the IT security verification review
     team.  The purpose of this review is to ensure that all controls and vulnerabilities are
     properly documented, and that adequate and appropriate levels of security exist for
     protection of the system.  Requirements and guidance for conducting IT serurity
     verification reviews are contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.5 of the "DOC IT
     Management Handbook" and Section 5 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

F.   Responsibilities and Process:

     Classified National Security IT Systems

     1.   The DOC Director for Information Resources Management is the DAA for all
          classified IT systems within the Department.  This authority can not be delegated
          below this level.  Accreditation will be granted only with the recommendations of
          the DOC Director, Office of Security, DOC Chief, Telecommunications
          Management Division and the DOC IT Security Manager.

     2.   The DOC IT Security Manager will act as the central point of contact for
          accreditation of classified IT systems and will evaluate the adequacy of all
          technical controls protecting these systems.  The DOC IT Security Manager will
          review all accreditation documentation, evaluate the security controls for the IT
          system and conduct on-site reviews, if necessary, to ensure they meet all applicable
          federal and DOC policies, regulations and standards and that they appear to be
          adequate and appropriate for protection of the system.  The DOC IT Security
          Manager will submit recommendations to the DAA for or against accreditation. 
          Recommendation should include any additional controls or constraints required to
          meet a satisfactory level of operational security.

     3.   The Chief, Telecommunications Management Division will evaluate all supporting
          accreditation documentation and conduct on-site inspections, when necessary, to
          ensure compliance with all Communications Security (COMSEC) and emanations
          (TEMPEST) security requirements as required by the Chapter 8 of the "DOC IT
          Management Handbook."

     4.   The DOC Director, Office of Security will evaluate all supporting accreditation
          documentation and conduct on-site inspections, when necessary, to ensure
          compliance with appropriate national security directives and DAO 207-2, "DOC
          National Security Information Manual."  

     Unclassified Sensitive IT Systems 

     1.   The Senior Information Resources Management official in each operating unit will
          be the DAA for all sensitive systems within their organization.  This approval
          authority may only be delegated to a senior management official of a subordinate
          organizational unit, if that official does not have direct control over the IT system
          being accredited.  Delegation of accreditation authority must be requested and
          approved in advance by the DOC Director for Information Resources Management. 
            

     2.   The operating unit ITSO will act as the central point of contact for accreditation of
          all sensitive IT systems within the organization.  The ITSO will review all
          accreditation documentation, evaluate the security controls for the IT system and
          conduct on-site reviews, if necessary, to ensure they meet all applicable federal and
          DOC policies, regulations and standards and that they appear to be adequate and
          appropriate for protection of the system.  The ITSO will submit recommendations
          to the DAA for or against accreditation.  Recommendations should include any
          additional controls or constraints required to meet a satisfactory level of
          operational security.

          The operating unit ITSO will submit an accreditation status report quarterly to the
          DOC IT Security Manager, listing accredited systems by DOC identification
          numbers, including interim accreditations, and the completed date.  A copy of all
          official accreditation statements will be forwarded with this list.
  
     IT System Owners

     Chapter 10, Section 10.1 of the "DOC IT Management Handbook" and Section 1 of the
     "DOC IT Security Manual" contain specific information about designation of ownership
     of IT systems and data.  Owners of DOC IT systems will complete all required actions
     and prepare an accreditation package including all documentation identified in this
     section.  For classified IT systems, the accreditation package will be forwarded to the
     DOC IT Security Manager through the ITSO and the Senior Information Resources
     Management official for the operating unit.  Sensitive IT system accreditation packages
     will be forwarded to the appropriate ITSO for the operating unit.

     The information included in the accreditation package will contain details about the
     system, which may identify weaknesses or vulnerabilities which require protection
     against disclosure to persons without an official need to know.  Accreditation packages
     for sensitive systems will be marked at least "For Official Use Only."  Classified IT
     system accreditation packages will be marked in accordance with appropriate national
     security directives and DAO 207-2, "DOC National Security Information Manual."
     
     The following actions shall be completed and the appropriate documentation prepared
     and submitted in the accreditation package to the appropriate DAA for the IT system:

     Request for Accreditation

     The system owner will prepare a written request for approval to operate the IT system
     and forward the documentation listed below to the appropriate DAA.  The written
     request will include a certification statement that the IT system has undergone adequate
     tests to ensure that it meets all federal and DOC policies, regulations and standards and
     that all installed security safeguards appear to be adequate and appropriate for the
     sensitivity of the system.   



     Approved IT System Security Plan
     
     A detailed IT system security plan will be prepared by the system owner, in the
     required format provided in the "DOC Guidelines for Developing and Evaluating
     Security Plans for Sensitive and Classified Systems," contained in Section 2 of the
     "DOC IT Security Manual."  The purpose of the system security plan is to provide a
     basic overview of the security and privacy requirements of the subject system and the
     IT system owner's plan for meeting those requirements.  The plan may also be viewed
     as documentation of the structured process of planning adequate, cost-effective security
     protection for the system.  

     The IT system security plan must be forwarded through the operating unit's ITSO for
     review and comment, and once all corrective actions have been completed, to the DOC
     IT Security Manager for final approval.  A statement of approval will be sent to the
     operating unit ITSO for forwarding to the IT system owner.  Security plans must be
     reviewed by the system owner, at least annually, and changes submitted, as necessary,
     to ensure they are up-to-date.     
     
     Chapter 10, Section 10.2 of the "DOC IT Management Handbook" contains the DOC
     policy for IT system security plans.  Section 2 of the "DOC IT Security Manual"
     contains detailed guidance for preparation of these plans.

     Completed Risk Analysis

     IT system owners are responsible for having a risk analysis conducted for each IT
     system to ensure that appropriate, cost effective safeguards are incorporated into
     existing and new systems.  A risk analysis will be conducted prior to approval of design
     specifications for new systems, when major changes occur to the system or every three
     years, whichever occurs first.  Examples of major system changes are given in Section
     E., Reaccreditation, of this document.  

     See Chapter 10, Section 10.7 of the "DOC IT Management Handbook" and Section 7 of
     the "DOC IT Security Manual" for guidance on conducting the required risk analysis.

     Contingency/Disaster Recovery Plans

     Each IT system shall develop and maintain, in an up-to-date state, a contingency and
     disaster recovery plan which will provide reasonable assurance that critical data
     processing can be continued, or resumed quickly, if normal operations are interrupted. 
     The plan for large systems supporting essential Departmental or agency functions shall
     be fully documented and operationally tested at least annually.  Small systems may
     develop a more abbreviated and less formal plan.  Policy concerning
     contingency/disaster recovery planning is contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.8 of the
     "DOC IT Management Handbook" and Section 8 of the "DOC IT Security Manual." 
     Additional guidance is contained in Section 7 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

     Software Application Certification Statements

     Sensitive application software shall be thoroughly tested prior to implementation to
     verify that the user functions and the required administrative, technical, and physical
     safeguards are present and are effectively operating as intended. If the system to be
     accredited is running major applications requiring separate certification, system owners
     will provide copies of all software application certification and recertification statements
     as part of the accreditation package.  General support system owners running
     applications belonging to other organizations are not required to provide these
     certification statements.  

     Certification Testing of Security Controls

     Prior to accreditation, each IT system is to undergo appropriate technical evaluations to
     ensure that it meets all federal and DOC policies, regulations and standards and that all
     installed security safeguards appear to be adequate and appropriate for the sensitivity of
     the system.  The technical evaluation results are the basis for the system owner's
     certification statement in the accreditation request.  The letter should state what methods
     were used to perform the certification evaluation.  The DOC certification policy is
     contained in Chapter 10, Section 10.3 of the "DOC IT Management Handbook." 
     Section 3 of the "DOC IT Security Manual contains two approved methodologies for
     conducting certification testing.   

     The following certification evaluation documentation will be included in the
     accreditation package, as applicable:

     1.   System Owner Certification Reports

          Include a copy of the certification review report that shows:  (1) that controls
          function properly; (2) that controls satisfy performance criteria and provide for
          availability, survivability and accuracy; and (3) that the controls cannot be easily
          broken or circumvented.  Copies of evaluation results should be included.

     2.   Other Internal Reviews

          The results of any security related reviews performed by evaluation teams internal
          to the operating unit or the system owner's organization may be used as part of the
          certification evaluation.  Copies of review findings and corrective actions should
          be included in the accreditation package.  

     3.   External Reviews

          The results of any audits performed by independent external organizations may
          also be used as part of the certification evaluation.  Copies of audit findings and
          corrective actions taken should be included in the accreditation package.

          For classified IT systems, external organizations such as Department of Defense,
          National Security Agency, State Department, Central Intelligence Agency, etc.,
          who have specific requirements for data under their area of responsibility, may
          also perform reviews and inspections.  Any authorizations or approvals provided
          by these external organizations are important certification documentation and must
          be provided with the request for accreditation.


                                   ATTACHMENT 1

                          SAMPLE ACCREDITATION STATEMENTS

Full Accreditation:

I have carefully examined the accreditation package documentation for DOC Information
Technology (IT) System Number ______, "ABC Computer Center," dated ____________. 
Based on my authority and judgment, and weighing the remaining residual risk against
operational requirements, I authorize (continued) operation of this system (under the following
restrictions).

                                  (restrictions)

I hereby accredit DOC IT System Number ______, "ABC Computer Center," as an
unclassified sensitive system, for a period not to exceed three years.  Should any major
changes occur to this system during this three year period, a re-evaluation of the adequacy of
its security controls must be conducted and a reaccreditation requested.


                         _____________________________________
                         DAA Signature and Date

Interim Accreditation:

I have carefully examined the accreditation package documentation for DOC Information
Technology (IT) System Number ______, "ABC Computer Center," dated __________. 
Based on my authority and judgment and the recommendation of the (System Owner, ITSO
or DAA judgmentt) it does not appear that this system has reached a satisfactory level of
operational security (or the following actions must be completed or additional controls
implemented prior to full accreditation).

                    (actions or additional controls required)  

I hereby grant an interim accreditation to DOC IT System Number ______, "ABC Computer
Center," for a period not to exceed six months to allow time to (take action or implement
additional controls required).  Prior to the expiration of this interim accreditation on
_______________, the accreditation package shall be resubmitted showing that a satisfactory
level of operational security has been reached.

                         ______________________________________
                         DAA Signature and Date
                                     SECTION 5
               INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY VERIFICATION REVIEWS

A.   Purpose:

     The purpose of this section is to establish Department of Commerce (DOC) policy for
     conducting information technology (IT) security verification reviews of the
     Department's sensitive and classified national security IT systems.  The purpose of the
     IT security verification review is to provide a level of review and evaluation
     independent of the system owner, that will verify that adequate and appropriate levels
     of protection are being provided for the individual systems, based on their unique
     protection requirements.

B.   Overview:

     Protection requirements for each of the individual IT systems within the Department
     will vary according to the unique characteristics of the system, environmental concerns,
     data sensitivity and mission related criticality of the system or data.  Total protection
     against all threats may be an unrealistic goal.  Appropriate levels of security must be
     determined by an evaluation of the threats, vulnerabilities and risk factors associated
     with each system.  Cost-effective controls that are adequate to achieve an acceptable
     level of risk for the individual system must then be implemented.

     System owners are responsible for completing all DOC and federal requirements for
     identifying their sensitive and classified systems, preparing security plans that provide a
     basic overview of the security and privacy requirements of the subject system and the
     system owner's plan for meeting those requirements, conducting risk assessments,
     implementing controls determined to be required and cost-effective, developing
     contingency and disaster recovery plans that will ensure availability of the system for
     mission accomplishment and completing all requirements for certification and
     accreditation of the system.  The IT security verification review process provides an
     independent means to ensure that the system owner has implemented adequate and
     appropriate levels of protection, based on the system's unique requirements.  The IT
     security verification review process is part of the Department's oversight program.

C.   Background and Authority:

     The DOC IT security verification review process is established in compliance with the
     "Computer Security Act of 1987," Public Law 100-235, OMB Circular A-130,
     Appendix III, "Security of Federal Automated Information Systems" and OMB Bulletin
     90-08, "Guidance for Preparation of Security Plans for Federal Computer Systems that
     Contain Sensitive Information."


D.   Scope:

     The policy contained in this document covers all DOC IT resources that have been
     identified as either sensitive or classified national security systems whether maintained
     in-house or commercially.

E.   Policy:

     An IT security verification review will be conducted on all DOC sensitive or classified
     national security IT systems by an evaluation team under the direction of the DOC IT
     Security Manager or the operating unit ITSO or the ITSO of a subordinate
     organizational unit every three years.  The security plan for the system will be used as
     the foundation for the actual review.  The review will be conducted in accordance with
     the guidance contained in the "DOC Guidelines for Conducting IT Security Verification
     Reviews of Sensitive and Classified Systems," Attachment 2 to this document.

F.   Responsibilities and Process:

     IT Security Verification Review Team

     The IT security verification review team will always be under the direction of the DOC
     IT Security Manager or the IT Security Officer (ITSO) at the operating unit level or a
     major subordinate organizational unit.  This should assure the level of knowledge about
     the DOC IT security program requirements is adequate to make decisions about the
     appropriateness and adequacy of controls required for the system under review. 
     Whenever possible, these individuals should participate in the on-site review as the
     team leader.  When the ITSO is unable to participate in the actual review, they will
     appoint an individual who is judged to have sufficient knowledge about the DOC IT
     security program to act as the review team leader.  Additional team members should
     include personnel knowledgeable about physical and environmental security, personnel
     security, information security (if system processes classified national security
     information), application security, hardware and software, telecommunications, technical
     controls, procedural security, contingency and disaster recovery planning and risk
     management.  Personnel from the Internal Control Review area within the organization
     are also suggested as team members.  The actual number of team members may vary
     and should be limited to the smallest number possible to cover all areas of concern. 
     The average team will include two to four individuals, but should be comprised of no
     less than two people.

     Operating units may contract out for IT security verification reviews to be conducted by
     commercial consulting firms or other federal organizations.  However, care should be
     taken in preparing the procurement requests or agreements to ensure that the review will
     be conducted in accordance with all DOC policies and standards.  The operating unit
     ITSO will act as the COTR for the contract, provide all directions for conducting the
     review and set standards for written reports.

     The team leader will be responsible for notifying the system owner of the planned
     review, making specific review assignments to individual team members based on their
     expertise, coordinating activities of team members, conducting an in-briefing and an
     exit-briefing with the system owners, conducting team meetings as required, making
     decisions about what recommendations are appropriate for the individual system and
     preparation of the draft and final "IT Security Verification Review Report."  The format
     and guidance for preparing this report is contained in Attachment 1 of this document. 

     Conducting the Review
     
     Written notification should be sent to the system owner two to four weeks in advance
     of the review, providing information concerning the purpose of the review, dates of the
     review, list of review team members, requesting the assignment of a point of contact
     and that the following documentation be made available to the review team.

     1.   Memorandum officially designating an individual as the IT System Security
          Officer (ITSSO)

     2.   Listing of current personnel (indicate working hours for ADP personnel)

     3.   Hours of operation of facility

     4.   Organization charts for highlighting the placement of the individual facilities

     5.   Applicable floor plans (including building floor plans)

     6.   Latest risk analyses for the system

     7.   Reports of external and internal security (both ADP and other) evaluations
          completed during the 3 years

     8.   Hardware inventory (to include minis and micros)

     9.   Software inventory (include production programs, utility programs, commercially
          available software, operating systems, etc.)

     10.  List of users:

          a.within the Department
          b.at other federal agencies
          c.others

     11.  Disaster recovery plans

     12.  Policies, directives, guidelines, etc., pertaining to IT  security issued by local
          authorities

     13.  Minutes of any management meetings that address IT security

     14.  Any other documentation pertaining to IT security

     15.  Information pertaining to IT security awareness and training including course
          content, type of training and number of personnel who have completed or are
          scheduled for training

     16.  Information pertaining to ADP-related position sensitivity and personnel screening
          for facility

     17.  Copies of any contracts for operation and maintenance or other service agreements
          related to this system

     18.  Reports of any internal IT security reviews that may have been conducted

     19.  Reports of any Internal Control Reviews or any reviews conducted by other
          external or internal organizations

     20.  Discussion of any known needs for guidance or assistance or specific areas of
          concern in IT security from either the operating unit, Department or federal levels

     21.  Sensitive System Security Plan

     22.  Certification documentation, if available

     The system owner should appoint an individual, usually the ITSSO, to act as the point
     of contact for the review team.  This individual should participate as an observer in the
     review and coordinate interviews or make other arrangements as necessary to assist the
     review team.  An entrance meeting should be arranged to allow the review team to
     explain its mission and review methods to the system owner and staff members. 
     During the course of the review, the team will discuss their findings and
     recommendations with the point of contact or system owner and keep them advised
     about the progress of the review.

     The security plan for the system will be used as the foundation for the actual review. 
     The security plan will provide information about the technical and physical system, its
     sensitivity level and its protection requirements.  The security plan is intended as a
     basic overview and will not contain the level of detailed information that the review
     team will need in making decisions about its actual security requirements.  However,
     the plan should be accurate and reflect the actual system description, protection
     requirements and controls in place,  Verification of the accuracy of the plan is an
     important element of the review process.  Recommendations to improve the quality of
     the security plan should be made during the course of the review.  In many cases, the
     review team may find that many of their recommendations will concern changes to the
     security plan and not to the actual system controls.

     Prior to the actual on-site review of the system, all team members should be provided
     with a copy of the security plan for the system to be reviewed.  The team should meet
     to discuss the scope of the review, which will be determined by the size, sensitivity
     level, type and complexity of the system as identified in Section I. through Section
     III.B. in the security plan.  During the actual on-site review, it is recommended that the
     team leader be the evaluator to verify the information contained in these sections of the
     plan.  The team leader should share the results of the verification with all other team
     members to ensure that their reviews are based on accurate requirements for the system. 
     Although it is not necessary for all team members to be experts about what controls are
     appropriate for every type system, they should be given enough guidance about the
     system under review to avoid wasting too much time asking questions that are not
     relevant for the particular system.  A very obvious example of this would be if the
     system under review is a microcomputer or local area network system, asking questions
     relating to a computer room would not be relevant.  A less obvious example would be
     for a system that contains nothing but public information, asking multiple questions
     about confidentiality controls would be a waste of time and might lead to inappropriate
     recommendations.  Other considerations that would have a bearing on determining
     adequate and appropriate protection requirements for a specific system would include
     the physical location, environment, category of system, telecommunication
     configuration, sensitivity of data, availability requirements and importance to mission
     accomplishment.

     It is important to understand that the IT security verification review is not intended to
     be a risk analysis.  Testing of actual controls will be limited to only those necessary to
     verify their existence and proper operation.  If documentation of prior testing of
     controls appears adequate (i.e., risk analysis or system certification documentation) then
     further testing would not be conducted.  Appropriate tests might include such things as:
     (1) having system owner demonstrate access controls on the system (i.e., logging into
     the system to ensure password is blanked, attempting to establish passwords outside
     established password constraints, viewing SCREEN WARNING messages, attempting to
     access files that should be restricted, etc.); (2) attempting to access computer room
     outside normal working hours to ensure doors are locked or verifying that visitors are
     challenged.  Evaluators are not to attempt penetration of the computer or to remove any
     system resources (i.e., equipment, media or printed output, etc.), as these actions could
     be considered security violations.

     At the conclusion of the review, the "IT Security Verification Review Report" will be
     prepared in the format outlined in Attachment 1 of this document.  A copy of the draft
     report with major findings and recommendations should be provided to the system
     owner during the exit-briefing.  Within two weeks after the conclusion of the review,
     the system owner should provide the review team leader written comments or questions
     about the draft report findings and recommendations.  The review team should consider
     the system owner's concerns and prepare and forward the final report for the system
     owner's action. 

     The information included in the "IT Security Verification Review Report" will contain
     details about the system, which may identify weaknesses or vulnerabilities which
     require protection against disclosure to persons without an official need to know. 
     Reports for sensitive systems will be marked at least "For Official Use Only." 
     Classified IT system reports will be marked in accordance with appropriate national
     security directives and DAO 207-2, "DOC National Security Information Manual."

     Use of the "IT Security Verification Review Guideline"

     The guideline, contained in Attachment 2, provides a structured process for
     accomplishment of the required IT security verification review for DOC IT systems.  It
     was developed following the format required for DOC IT system security plans and
     provides detailed questions for each section contained in the plans.  Since the purpose
     of the IT security verification review is to determine if the individual IT system has
     been provided with adequate and appropriate levels of protection based on its unique
     protection requirements, many of the questions under specific control areas will not
     apply to all IT systems.

     An attempt has been made in developing the "IT Security Verification Review
     Guideline" to formulate questions that cover the majority of possible security concerns
     and requirements that could possibly apply to any DOC sensitive or classified IT
     system.  The questions are not intended to be all inclusive, and answers provided may
     generate other questions.  Additional questions may also result from the review of
     system documentation and records or as the result of interviews or observations by the
     team members.  Team members will be required to rely on their judgement about what
     is appropriate and adequate protection requirements for the system they are evaluating. 
     The guideline questions should be reviewed by the evaluator in advance of any
     interviews and those determine not be applicable, marked off.  The team leader should
     be able to assist in determining the appropriate questions or areas to be reviewed.

     System Owners

     System owners may also find this guideline helpful in performing management control
     reviews and the required risk analysis or certification testing of their systems.  The
     guideline contains extensive questions about all categories of controls and could be
     useful in verifying that adequate consideration of appropriate controls has been included
     in their risk analysis, certification methodologies or for management control review
     ideas.  It may also serve as a useful tool in identifying additional controls that would be
     appropriate for their systems.
                                   ATTACHMENT 1

                         INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY 
                         VERIFICATION REVIEW REPORT FORMAT

Format

The "Information Technology (IT) Security Verification Review Reports" should be consistent
across all DOC organizations and should contain the following sections:

     Cover page  

     Executive Summary
          Introduction

     Discussion
          Objective
          Method

     System and Sensitivity Information
          System Description/Purpose
          System Environment and Special Considerations
          General Description of Information Sensitivity

     Recommendations

The following sample report was prepared in the appropriate format and contains guidance for
content in each section.
            



                         (ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING REVIEW) 

                      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY REVIEW


                            DOC SYSTEM NUMBER         
                                 (OPERATING UNIT)
                                (SUB ORGANIZATION)

                                (SYSTEM NAME/TITLE)
                                         

                       (CITY, STATE WHERE SYSTEM IS LOCATED)














                                   (MONTH, YEAR)



                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


Introduction

An Information Technology (IT) Security Verification Review, in
conformance with the requirements of the Computer Security Act of 1987
and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Bulletin 90-08, was
conducted during the period                   at the (Operating Unit, Sub-
organization, System Name/Title, in City, State.)

The IT Security Review Team was lead by                           ,
(Organization and Title).  (List all other team members by name,
organization and title) team members.  Each team member was assigned
specific sections of the Sensitive System Security Plan for the         
system, to verify and validate the accuracy of the information contained
in the plan and to ensure that the system controls were adequate and
appropriate for the system.  The review was conducted in accordance
with guidance contained in the "DOC Guidelines for Conducting
Information Technology Security Verification Reviews of Sensitive and
Classified Systems".

The IT Security Review was conducted on the DOC IT System Number    
   , "(Name/Title of System)".  The system (describe in general terms the
purpose of the system.  See Section I.E. in the security plan.) 

The overall IT security profile of this system was (excellent, very good,
good, adequate, inadequate or poor).  This paragraph should contain
summary information about the findings, including positive actions,
controls or other significant items that the system owner has implemented
to protect the system.  Any major problems noted during the course of
the review should be described in general terms or "no major problem
were noted".  Recommendations primarily concerned (describe in general
categories (i.e., improvements in administrative procedures,
documentation, contingency planning, backup storage, personnel
management and user access control).) 

The purpose of this review was to improve IT security specifically and IT
resource management in general at (system name) and to ensure
compliance with prescribed IT security policies and regulations and to
identify areas where further security controls may be necessary to
improve the protection of the system.

At the conclusion of the on-site visit, the review team discussed its
preliminary findings with the (system) management and IT security staff
personnel who indicated general agreement and a willingness to
implement all recommendations (or major objections).  Implementation
of the recommendations will provide assurance that all risks have been
identified and appropriate levels of security exist for protection of the
system. 

                                    DISCUSSION

Objective

The objectives of this review were to determine the coordination and
implementation of activities conducted by the (system organization) to
ensure the protection and integrity of information resources such as
development of security plans for sensitive and classified systems,
ensuring periodic risk assessments are conducted, establishing
contingency and disaster recovery plans, implementing a security
awareness and training program, performing IT security reviews, and
certification and accreditation of sensitive systems.

Specific laws, regulations and policies used as guidelines for this review,
included:

     OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, "Security of Federal Automated
     Information Systems"

     Public Law 100-235, the "Computer Security Act of 1987"

     Department of Commerce, "Information Technology Handbook,
     Chapter 10, Information Technology Security"

     OMB Bulletin 90-08, "Guidance for Preparation of Security Plans
     for Federal Computer Systems that Contain Sensitive Information"

     Department of Commerce, "Guidelines for Conducting Information
Technology         Security Verification Reviews of Sensitive and Classified
Systems"

This review was conducted to evaluate compliance with federal and
Departmental IT security policies and requirements and assess the
system's IT security profile.  Review criteria was based on evaluation of
the in-place and planned controls identified in the Sensitive System
Security Plan for this system (DOC System Number        ).

Method

The review team's approach in this evaluation was to interview (system
name/title) management and staff personnel, observe operations of the
system and the physical facilities and resources within the buildings and
review all IT security program related documentation.  The primary
point-of-contact for this system review was (Name and title).   Other Staff
members contacted during the review included: (List names and titles).  


During the entrance interview with system management and staff
personnel, the review team's mission and methods were explained in
detail.
                        SYSTEM AND SENSITIVITY INFORMATION


SYSTEM DESCRIPTION/PURPOSE

(Copy information contained in Section I.E. of the security plan or
correct information after the conclusion of the review.) 

SYSTEM ENVIRONMENT AND SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

(Copy information contained in Section I.F. of the security plan or
correct information after the conclusion of the review.)

GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF INFORMATION SENSITIVITY

(Copy information contained in Section II.B. of the security plan or
correct information after the conclusion of the review.)                                  RECOMMENDATIONS


The review was conducted, using the "DOC Guidelines for Conducting
Information Technology Security Verification Reviews of Sensitive and
Classified Systems" and the "Sensitive System Security Plan" for DOC
System        , as the basis.  The review included on-site inspections of
the facilities, computer room environment, hardware configuration, and
interviews of management and computer center personnel The following
recommendations are a result of the review findings:

The security plan for this system should be updated to incorporate any
changes resulting from these recommendations. 

         Recommendations should be numbered.

         Recommendations should be listed by security plan section
          number. Example Section III.C.2.b.  This will relate each
          finding and recommendation to a specific control category. 
          There may be multiple separate recommendations under a
          specific section number.

         Each finding and recommendation should be discussed with the
          system owner during the exit briefing in as much detail as
          possible by the review team member making the
          recommendation.  Every effort should be made to discuss
          findings with the point of contact or system owner prior to the
          exit briefing.  This will ensure that all significant facts have
          been taken into consideration about any unique situations or
          requirements affecting the individual system.  Discussion about
          security requirements during the course of the review also
          provides an excellent opportunity to increase IT security
          awareness and training. 
                                     SECTION 6.1
                                MALICIOUS SOFTWARE


A.   Purpose:      

     The purpose or this section is to establish Department of Commerce
     (DOC) policy to minimize the risk of introducing malicious software
     into computer systems.  It also provides guidelines for the detection
     and removal of malicious software from information technology (IT)
     systems.

B.   Overview:     

     Malicious software presents an increasingly serious security problem
     for computer systems and networks. Malicious software includes
     viruses and other destructive programs, such as Trojan horses and
     network worms.  This type or software is often written as
     independent programs that appear to provide useful functions but
     also contain malicious programs that can be very destructive.  It can
     be quickly spread through software bulletin boards, shareware, and
     users unknowingly copying and sharing these programs in an
     unauthorized manner.  It can also be spread by users sharing data
     files and software products. Networks are particularly vulnerable as
     they allow very rapid spread of the virus to all systems connected to
     the network. 

     A program that is infected with a virus can infect any host in which
     the program is used.  Because of the insidious nature or a virus, any
     user may become an unwitting propagator.  Commerce's dependence
     on networked computer systems, personal computers (PCs), and
     office automation makes us susceptible to virus "attacks."

     Computer viruses have become a threat to virtually everyone using a
     computer.  A virus can destroy programs and data by copying itself
     to other programs.  It is then executed when the infected program is
     run.  It can disable computers and entire computer networks.  It can
     also cause lost computer time and staff resources to track and
     eliminate it. 

     Most operating units within the Department have been infected with
     different computer viruses.  In many cases, data was not lost but
     time and staff resources were wasted tracking and eliminating these
     viruses. 

     PCs are more susceptible to viruses than other types of computers
     due to their widespread use.  However, viruses can be created for
     any type of computer.  Malicious programs such as Trojan horses
     and trap doors were originally written for mainframe computer
     systems.  Introduction of malicious programs into these larger
     systems is usually caused by unauthorized users accessing a system
     without adequate controls or by authorized users making
     unauthorized use of the system. 

     Sound IT security procedures will help detect and prevent computer
     viruses and other malicious programs from spreading or causing
     damage.  The guidelines contained in this document can be adapted
     for any type of computer system. 

C.   Background and Authority:

     Due to the widespread threat from computer viruses to all
     organizations, both private sector and government, it has become
     necessary to implement specific measures designed to reduce this
     threat and the potential damage caused by virus infections to DOC
     IT systems.  The DOC malicious software policy is established in
     compliance with the "Computer Security Act of 1987," Office of
     Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, and the
     "Computer Fraud and Abuse Act", Public Laws 98-473 and 99-474,
     18 U.S.Code 1030. 

D.   Scope:        

     This policy covers all IT systems that are used to process Commerce
     data, including contractor-owned and/or contractor-operated systems.
     

     This policy applies to all employees, personnel from other
     organizations, contractor personnel, and vendors using Commerce
     systems participating in DOC sponsored software development,
     software demonstrations, and the operation and maintenance of IT
     systems.

E.   Policy:       

     All DOC organizations will establish and implement a process and
     procedures to minimize the risk of introducing viruses and other
     malicious software, to ensure timely detection of viral infections, to
     provide procedures for eliminating viral infections from the
     Department's inventory of microcomputers (PCs), and to provide
     procedures to minimize the risk from malicious programs to larger
     systems, or systems where virus detection software is not yet
     available. 

F.   Responsibilities and Process:          

     Responsibilities

     The Director for Information Resources Management is responsible
     for the Department's IT security program.  This includes
     establishing IT security policies and procedures for safeguarding
     Departmental IT resources.  

     The Departmental IT Security Manager shall serve as the central
     point of contact for all matters relating to IT security for the
     Department and will be responsible for developing a process for
     disseminating information concerning the potential dangers from,
     and guidelines for control of, malicious software. 

     Operating unit IT Security Officers (ITSO) are responsible for:

     1.  Developing appropriate procedures and issuing instructions for
         the prevention, detection, and removal or malicious software
         consistent with the guidelines contained herein;

     2.  Ensuring all personnel within the operating unit are made aware
         of this policy and incorporating it into IT security briefings and
         training programs;

     3.  Identifying and recommending software packages for the
         detection and removal of malicious software;

     4.  Developing a system for users to report computer viruses and
         other incidents and then notifying potentially affected parties of
         the possible threat;

     5.  Promptly notifying the Departmental IT Security Manager of all
         IT security incidents including malicious software;

     6.  Providing assistance in determining the source of malicious
         software and the extent of contamination;

     7.  Providing assistance for the removal of malicious  software; and

     8.  Conducting periodic reviews to ensure that proper security
         procedures are followed, including those designed to protect
         against malicious software. 

     Managers must ensure that employees and contractors follow
     operating unit procedures which comply with this policy.

     Employees, personnel from other organizations using DOC systems,
     contractor personnel, and vendors are responsible for following
     operating unit procedures for the protection of IT resources to which
     they  have access.  This includes reporting IT security incidents,
     involving viruses and other malicious software to their manager or
     supervisor and the ITSO for their organization.

     Requirements

     The requirements defined in this section, when implemented, will
     minimize the risk from introduction of viruses and other malicious
     software to DOC IT systems and networks.  Not all requirements
     listed will apply to every IT system or network.  Each organization
     must consciously evaluate the appropriateness of each of the
     following policies and implement those that apply to the category for
     their particular system.
  
     1.  Procedures.  Each operating unit will establish appropriate
         procedures for adherence to this policy based on the criticality,
         sensitivity, and risks to their IT systems.  

         Until virus detection software becomes available for all types
         of IT  systems, the best protection against malicious software
         attacks is to establish good IT security procedures to control
         access to and actions taken on the IT system.

     2.  Backing up software and data.  Employees should back up
         new software immediately, retaining the original distribution
         diskettes in a safe and secure location.  Write-protect original
         diskettes prior to making back-up copies.  If a virus destroys
         the working copy, the original software is still available. 
         Copying copyrighted software material without the vendor's
         consent is illegal.  If a vendor has not provided pre-approval
         of backup copies, employees must have vendor approval to
         create additional copies.  Use only newly-formatted diskettes
         for copying software for backup storage.  Used disks may
         already contain malicious programs which would contaminate
         the backup copies. 

         Data files should be backed up frequently and stored off-site
         or in a secured environment.

         Restore damaged software programs from the original
         diskettes, not from regular backups.  A virus may have been
         introduced prior to backup.
 
     3.  Outgoing software.  A serious impact on the credibility of the
         Department would result from being identified as the source
         of a virus.  Therefore, all software and data leaving the
         Department must be checked for viruses or other malicious
         coding.

         Use only new media for making copies for distribution. 
         Where possible, use a stand-alone computer system when
         preparing copies for distribution.

         PC systems to which access is somewhat open, (i.e., training
         rooms or user laboratories, etc.) should never be used as a
         source of software or files to be transmitted and/or copied
         for distribution, without first taking steps to ensure that the
         system is free from viruses or other malicious software.

     4.  Software.  All PC machine-readable media will be scanned for
         malicious software before initial use.  Follow all vendor
         instructions carefully and write-protect virus scanning software
         media prior to use.  Scanning software can become contaminated
         in the same way as other software.  Although software sealed in
         "shrink-wrapped" plastic is usually checked by vendors, it is still
         advisable to scan this software since there have been reported
         cases in the Department of software contamination.  Write-protect
         software prior to scanning to prevent possible contamination from
         system and virus scan software being used.

         Several reputable software packages are available to detect and/or
         remove viruses from machine-readable media.  There are also
         utilities that can search text files for virus signatures.  Most
         packages are designed for PC systems and local area networks,
         but may not be adequate for all PC operating systems.  There are
         very few available for larger systems.    
     
         Requirements to scan for malicious software are to be
         implemented as soon as the tools become available for a
         particular combination of hardware and software. 
     
         Establish controls for local area networks that prevent anyone
         except the system administrator or other authorized staff from
         loading software on file servers.  Ensure that operating system
         files and other executable files are read-only.  If possible, disable
         the network mail facility from transferring executable files.  This
         will help prevent network worm programs from spreading
         through the network.

         Trojan horses and other similar malicious software programs
         are most often introduced by insiders and it is not unusual
         for larger systems to be the target.  The best protection
         against attacks of this type are to establish good
         management procedures.  Effective controls include
         separation of duties, limiting individual access and allowed
         actions to what is needed and no more, formal change
         control and configuration management procedures,
         separation and testing of development versus production
         software and control over installation of new software
         versions.  Frequent backups of the system and data will
         allow recovery should an incident occur.

     5.  Authorized software.  It is imperative that machine-readable
         software and data files be obtained from reliable sources. 
         Viruses are often spread through free or shared programs,
         games, demonstration programs, and programs downloaded from
         bulletin boards.  Employees must not use privately-owned
         software or take software from their office without management
         approval.  Commercial software must be obtained through
         appropriate procurement channels.  In-house developed software
         must be done in accordance with established policy within the
         operating unit and have prior management approval.

         Shareware and freeware software must be obtained only with
         prior management approval.  Software obtained
         electronically from bulletin boards should be downloaded to
         newly formatted diskettes and not directly to the computer
         hard disk.  All newly acquired software, regardless of source,
         is subject to the scanning requirements in sub-paragraph 4
         above.

     6.  Employee demonstrations.  When possible, employees
         demonstrating DOC products must be certain that the hardware
         and software they are using are free of viruses.  Use hardware
         write-protection mechanisms (i.e., read-only diskettes with write
         tabs; write-protect rings for tapes; knock-out rings on cassettes,
         etc.) to avoid any virus from infecting the media.  If possible,
         check the hardware for viruses before loading the demonstration
         software.  Do not allow other software to be used until the
         demonstration is completed.

     7.  Passwords.  For larger systems and networks, user identification
         and passwords are the primary protection mechanism against
         malicious software.  If the would-be perpetrators cannot get into
         the system, they cannot put malicious software on the system. 
         When possible, all IT systems that are shared resources,
         including local area networks and multi-user stand-alone systems
         shall implement a user identification and verification system,
         such as a USERID and password.  Conformance to the
         requirements of Chapter 10, Section 10.16 of the "DOC IT
         Management Handbook," and Section 16 of the "DOC IT
         Security Manual" in establishment, structure, individual
         accountability, periodic changing and removal are required.

         Log files should be reviewed periodically to detect unusual
         activity.  Terminals, workstations and networked PCs should
         never be left unattended when logged in.

     8.  Vendor demonstrations.  Vendors will demonstrate their software
         on stand-alone hardware, where possible.  An employee must
         scan the stand-alone hardware before it is used by the vendor to
         verify that the computer does not contain any viruses.  This
         shows the Department acted in good faith to prevent infecting the
         vendor's software.

         An employee will scan the stand-alone hardware when the
         demonstration is completed to determine if the vendor
         software contains a virus and remove it from the system. 
         The vendor should be notified immediately to prevent further
         infections.

         In the case of network software demonstrations, the system
         administrator must approve and coordinate the
         demonstrations.

         Written certification from the vendor that the demonstration
         software has been checked and is free from viruses, should
         be obtained prior to loading any vendor software.
 
     9.  Hardware.  PC hard disk drives, network file servers and other
         media which will be used to handle departmental information will
         be formatted between the time they are received and put into use. 
         There have been cases of formatted hard disk drives being
         received that contained viruses.  This requirement also applies to
         replacement parts resulting from repair and maintenance of
         equipment.  This requirement may be waived only if the vendor
         installing the software provides a written certification that the
         system and software have been checked and are virus free.

         Never start up (boot) your computer from a diskette unless it
         is the original write-protected system master or a trusted
         copy.

         Portable computer systems, such as laptops, that leave
         Department controlled areas must be scanned for viruses
         before and after connecting to systems or software owned by
         other organizations.

         Never use a local area network file server as a workstation. 
         File servers should be located in areas where access is
         restricted during working hours and locked after hours.

         When available and cost effective, virus detection software
         capable of continuous monitoring and reporting malicious
         programs, should be installed on hard disks to prevent
         contamination.

         Periodic scans of hard disks, using virus detection software,
         should be performed for systems without this protection
         installed.

         Lock computers and terminals or disconnect keyboards and
         store in a secure location, when not in use, to prevent
         unauthorized access.  Lock doors to areas containing
         computers and terminals.

     10.    Procurement requirement.  All procurements for
            computer software and hardware will contain a
            requirement that the vendor have antiviral procedures in
            place to ensure that the media supplied is
            uncontaminated by malicious software.  In the case of
            small, off-the-shelf procurements where it is not possible
            to write antiviral clauses, the software will be scanned
            with virus detection software prior to use.  Procurements
            for PC system maintenance should also require antiviral
            procedures on the part of the contractor.

         Vendors depend on the reputation of their products to ensure
         future sales.  Reputable vendors are concerned about
         correcting any flaws in their systems or products that would
         make them vulnerable to attack from viruses or other
         malicious software, and on occasion issue recommended
         changes to improve security of their products.  System
         administrators and managers are to implement any vendor
         recommended changes, or security fixes as soon as possible,
         after official receipt.

     Malicious Software Indicators

     If your IT system seems to be acting different than usual, a
     malicious software incident may have occurred.  Below are a few
     signs that may indicate that a system has been infected.
 
     1.  Any unexplained messages or graphics on the screen,

     2.  An increase in the time required to load or execute programs,

     3.  An increase in the time required for disk accesses or processing
         from disk,

     4.  Unusual error messages,

     5.  Programs or files mysteriously disappearing,

     6.  Less memory available than usual,

     7.  Executable files changing size for no apparent reason,

     8.  Accesses made to non-referenced devices,

     9.  Data consistently out of balance,

     10.    File date and time stamps changing for no apparent reason,

     11.    Obsolete user accounts in use, 

     12.    The presence of unexplained hidden files and/or

     13.    Unusual network activity.

     If your system demonstrates any of the above, it could indicate that
     malicious software is present. 


     Elimination, Recovery and Reporting

     If you suspect that your IT system or network has been attacked by
     a virus or other malicious software program, do not attempt to fix
     the problems, but immediately report it to your supervisor and the
     ITSO for your operating unit.  They will determine the appropriate
     action to control the damage and report the incident to the DOC IT
     Security Manager.  It is important that the particular virus or other
     malicious software program, source, and potential for proliferation
     be identified and controlled.

     The initial report to the DOC IT Security Manager should be made
     within 24 hours of the incident.  This report may be verbal and
     should include the following information:

         Date and time of incident
         Location
         Equipment type, make and model
         Malicious software type
         Method of discovery
         Virus name (if known)
         DOC system number (if known)
         Source of malicious software (if known)
         Apparent effect

     Within ten working days of the incident, a written report will be
     prepared and sent to the DOC IT Security Manager of the incident
     by the operating unit ITSO.  This report will include the following
     along with all of the above information:

         Impact on operation
         Severity, including hours devoted to recovery and any additional
         costs incurred 
         Proliferation, number of machines or media infected
         Action taken - how malicious software was cleared, who was
         notified, including    outside organizations, and what steps were
         taken to identify the source

     If the problem has not been resolved within ten working days, mark
     the written report "Interim" and prepare and forward a "Final"
     report when the incident is resolved.  In cases where resolution is
     not possible within 30 days, a written status report describing the
     actions taken and planned to resolve the incident must be sent to the
     DOC IT Security Manager monthly.

G.   Definitions:

     Introduction of viruses and other malicious software programs has
     generated a whole set of new terms.  The following list of definitions
     is provided to familiarize personnel with some of these terms.
  
     1.  Bacterium.  A late bloomer in the infectious terminology jargon
         is a "bacterium."  It is a program that replicates itself and
         becomes a parasite on the host system by preempting processor
         and memory capacity.

     2.  Computer virus.  A program that "infects" computer systems in
         much the same way as a biological virus infects humans.  The
         typical virus "reproduces" by making copies of itself and
         inserting them into other programs--either in systems software or
         in application programs. 
     
     3.  Flying Dutchman.  A feature of Trojan horse malicious
         programs that erases all traces of the programming codes
         from the computer's memory and eludes any detection.

     4.  Logic Bomb.  A computer code that is preset to cause a later
         malfunction when a specified set of logical conditions occur. 
         For example, a specific social security number in a payroll
         system is processed and the logic bomb is activated, causing
         an improper amount of money to be printed on the check.

     5.  Machine-readable media.  Media that can convey data to a given
         sensing device, e.g., diskettes, disks, tapes, computer memory.

     6.  Malicious Software.  Any of a family of computer programs
         developed with the sole purpose of doing harm.  Malicious
         code is usually embedded in software programs that appear to
         provide useful functions but, when activated by a user, cause
         undesirable results.

     7.  Scan.  To examine computer coding/programs sequentially, part
         by part.  For viruses, scans are made for virus signatures or
         potentially unsafe practices. (e.g., changes to an executable file,
         direct writes to specific disk sectors, et al.).

     8.  Time Bomb.  Computer code that is preset to cause a later
         malfunction after a specific date, time or a specific number of
         operations.  The "Friday the 13th" computer virus is an
         example.  This virus infects the system several days or even
         months before and lies dormant until the date reaches Friday
         the 13th.

     9.  Trap Door.  A set of instruction codes embedded in a
         computer operating system that permits access while bypassing
         security controls.

     10.  Trojan Horse.  A program that causes unexpected (and usually
          undesirable) effects when willingly installed or run by an
          unsuspecting user.  A person can either create or gain access to
          the source code of a common, frequently used program and then
          add code so that the program performs a harmful function in
          addition to its normal function.  These programs are generally
          deeply buried in the code of the target program, lie dormant for
          a preselected period, and are triggered in the same manner as a
          logic bomb.  A Trojan horse can alter, destroy, or disclose data
          or delete files.

     11.  Virus detection software.  Software written to scan machine-
          readable media on computer systems.  There are a growing
          number of reputable software packages available that are
          designed to detect and/or remove viruses.  In addition, many
          utility programs can search text files for virus signatures or
          potentially unsafe practices. 

     12.  Virus signature.  A unique set of characters which identify a
          particular virus.  This may also be referred to as a virus marker.

     13.  Worm.  A worm is a complete program that propagates itself
          from system to system, usually through a network or other
          communication facility.  A worm is similar to a virus--it is able
          to infect other systems and programs.  A worm differs from a
          virus in that a virus replicates itself, which a worm does not.  A
          worm copies itself to a person's workstation over a network or
          through a host computer and then spreads to other workstations. 
          It can easily take over a network as the "Internet" worm did. 
          Unlike a Trojan horse, a worm enters a system uninvited.

H.   References:

     Viruses and other malicious software appear to be a growing
     problem with new strains of viruses appearing continuously.  Users
     of IT systems should become as familiar with the subject as possible,
     in order to protect against this threat.  The following documents
     published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology are
     good sources of additional information:

          John Wack and Lisa Carnahan, Computer Viruses and
          Related Threats: A Management Guide, NIST Special
          Publication 500-166, August 1989.

          Dennis Steinauer, Security of Personal Computer Systems: A
          Management Guide, NBS Special Publication 500-120,
          January 1985.

          An Abbreviated Bibliography for Computer Viruses and
          Related Security Issues, NIST, Revised April 18, 1990.
