                     U. S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
                      COPYRIGHTED SOFTWARE POLICY

      Title 17, United States Code, Section 106 gives copyright
      owners exclusive rights to reproduce and distribute their
      material, and Section 504 states that copyright infringers
      can be held liable for damages to the copyright owner. 
      Title 18, United States Code provides felony penalties for
      software copyright infringement.

      It is the responsibility of each DOC employee and supervisor
      to protect the government's interests as they perform their
      duties.  This includes responsibility for assuring that
      commercial software, acquired by the government, is used
      only in accordance with licensing agreements.  Likewise, it
      is also their responsibility to assure that any proprietary
      software is properly licensed before being installed on DOC
      equipment.  This policy does not apply to software developed
      by or for a federal agency and no restrictions apply to its
      use or distribution within the federal government.  

      Supervisors will ensure that the following requirements are
      made known to all employees and will be held accountable for
      conducting periodic audits to ensure that these policies are
      being followed:

      1.   Install only commercial software, including shareware,
           that has been purchased through the government
           procurement process on DOC systems;

      2.   Follow all provisions of the license agreements issued
           with the software and register organizational
           ownership;

      3.   Do not make any illegal copies of copyrighted software. 
           Normally the license will allow a single copy to be
           made for archival purposes.  If the license is for 
           multiple users, do not exceed the authorized number of
           copies;  

      4.   At least annually, an inventory of all software on each
           individual PC will be audited against the
           organization's license agreement records to ensure that
           no illegal copies of commercial software are installed
           on any equipment.

      5.   Maintain written records of software installed on each
           machine and ensure that a license or other proof of
           ownership is on file for each piece of software; 

      6.   Store licenses, software manuals and procurement
           documentation in a secure location (i.e., closed file
           cabinet, etc.);

      7.   When upgrades to software are purchased, the old
           version should be disposed of in accordance with the
           licensing agreement to avoid a potential violation. 
           Upgraded software is considered a continuation of the
           original license, not an additional license;

      8.   Some government owned software licenses do allow
           employees to take copies home for use on their
           personally owned computers under specific circumstances
           (e.g., for government work but not personal business). 
           Unless the license specifically states that employees
           may take copies of software home for installation on
           home computers, doing so is a violation of the
           copyright law and the individual will be liable.  

      9.   All illegal copies of software will be deleted
           immediately.

      All organizations must acquire special purpose software to
      inventory and document all software on all PCs belonging to
      the organization.  This special purpose software may be a
      commercial product or the organization may acquire free
      software produced by the Software Publishers Association for
      this purpose from their operating unit ITSO.  

      Individual employees should be discouraged from installing 
      their personally owned software on government equipment.  If
      it is in the best interest of the DOC organization to allow
      personally owned software, authorization must be granted in
      writing by the immediate supervisor, showing the
      justification.  Prior to authorization, the employee must
      provide the software license and give assurance that
      copyright infringement will not occur from installation on
      government equipment.  Employees not following these
      procedures shall be held personally liable for any
      violations of the copyright laws and subject to the
      penalties contained in Title 17 and Title 18 of the United
      States Code.
