
Chapter 10.                Information Technology
                           Security

INTRODUCTION

      The "Computer Security Act of 1987," Public Law 100-235  and
      Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130 require
      all federal agencies to plan for the security of all
      sensitive IT systems throughout their life cycle.  OMB
      Circular A-130 also establishes a minimum set of controls to
      be included in federal Information Technology (IT) security
      programs.  The program must include the implementation of
      policies, standards, and procedures which are consistent
      with government-wide laws and regulations, to assure an
      adequate level of protection for IT systems whether
      maintained in-house or commercially.  The circular directs
      agencies to assure:

           1.    that IT systems operate effectively and
                 accurately;

           2.    that there are appropriate technical, personnel,
                 administrative, physical, environmental, and
                 telecommunications safeguards in IT systems; and

           3.    that the continuity of the operations of IT
                 systems that support critical agency functions is
                 preserved.

      The Department of Commerce (DOC) has established and
      implemented an IT security program which will provide
      reasonable and acceptable assurance that sensitive and
      classified national security IT systems are performing
      exactly as specified and doing nothing more; that sensitive
      and classified information is provided adequate protection;
      that data and software integrity is maintained; and, that
      unplanned disruptions of processing will not seriously
      impact mission accomplishment.

      People, hardware, software, telecommunications, facilities
      and data together form an IT system that is highly effective
      and productive.  However, all IT systems involve certain
      risks that must be addressed adequately through proper
      controls.  The policies contained in this chapter represent
      management's commitment to assuring confidentiality,
      integrity, availability and control of the Department's IT
      resources.

      Due to the complexity of the IT Security program
      requirements, the policy section of this chapter is divided
      into subsections that present policies by specific subjects,
      as appropriate.

      The "DOC IT Security Manual," Attachment 1 to this chapter,
      is being published as a separate document, which combines
      all policies, procedures, current detailed guidance and
      methodologies for accomplishing the Department's IT security
      program.  It is intended to provide individuals assigned IT
      security responsibilities and individual system owners with
      a more detailed single-source reference document, which will
      be up-dated as new policies, procedures, techniques,
      methodologies or program requirements are developed and
      issued.

A.    Purpose

      The DOC IT Security program complies fully with all federal
      laws, regulations and directives and communicates uniform
      policies for the protection and control of IT resources
      directly or indirectly relating to the activities of the
      Department.   

      The purpose of this chapter is to define all policies and
      responsibilities for the establishment, implementation,
      maintenance and oversight of the IT security program within
      the Department, for the protection and control of vital DOC
      IT resources.  Basic elements of the Department's IT
      security program requirements will be identified in relation
      to assigned responsibilities. 

B.    Overview

      Security of IT systems, as described in OMB Circular A-130,
      requires the protection of automated systems and information
      while associated with any automated processing activity, and
      the assurance that the systems do exactly what they are
      supposed to do and nothing more.  IT security requires
      management controls to ensure authorized access to the
      information in the systems and proper handling of input,
      processing, and output.  

      The implementation of an effective IT security program
      within the Department begins with the establishment of the
      organizational IT security structure and the assignment of
      broad responsibilities.

      Individuals appointed to positions with IT security
      responsibilities are accountable for compliance with all DOC
      or federal laws, regulations and policies related to the
      assigned responsibilities.



C.    Background and Authority

      The DOC IT Security Program is established in compliance
      with the "Computer Security Act of 1987," Public Law 100-
      235, OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, "Security of Federal
      Automated Information Systems," National Security Directive
      (NSD) 42, "National Policy for the Security of National
      Security Telecommunications and Information Systems" and
      Departmental Organizational Order DOO 20-14. 

D.    Scope

      The policies contained in this document are applicable to
      all DOC IT resources at all levels of sensitivity, whether
      maintained in-house or commercially.  These policies are
      mandatory on all organizational units, employees,
      contractors, and others having access to and/or using the IT
      resources of the Department.

      These policies apply to all automated technology currently
      in existence and to any new automated technology acquired
      after the effective date of this policy document.

      The IT security program focuses on assuring confidentiality,
      integrity and availability of all IT resources necessary for
      processing or transmitting the information.  The IT security
      program consists of a number of different elements,
      including some that might normally come under other security
      programs.  Those elements that are required by the "Computer
      Security Act of 1987" or OMB Circular A-130 are considered
      part of the IT security program and are included in this
      document.

E.    Policy

10.1  Program Requirements

      All DOC organizations will establish, implement and maintain
      an IT security program consistent with the Department and
      government-wide laws, regulations, policies, procedures and
      standards.  The program must include as a minimum, adequate
      and appropriate levels of protection for all IT resources
      within the organization, including hardware, software,
      physical and environmental facilities that support IT
      systems, telecommunications, administrative, personnel and
      data.  

      All IT systems will be identified and appropriate controls
      implemented in the following categories:

      1.   Management controls;

      2.   Acquisition/development/installation/implementation
           controls;

      3.   Operational controls;

      4.   IT security awareness and training; and

      5.   Technical controls.

      Responsibilities for the DOC IT security program starts at
      the Department level and flows down through management of
      all organizations to the individual users.

      1.   The DOC Office for Information Resources Management is
           responsible for security of DOC IT resources.  Non-IT
           security programs (e.g., theft of computer resources,
           physical security, personnel security, safeguarding
           classified material and Inspector General requirements)
           are stated in section G. below.

      2.   The head of each operating unit is responsible for
           adequate protection of the operating unit IT resources. 
           Staff responsibility for IT security shall be monitored
           by the operating unit Senior Official for Information
           Resources Management.

      3.   System owners are responsible for providing adequate
           and appropriate levels of protection for the IT
           resources under their control to prevent unauthorized
           disclosure, effective and accurate processing and
           continuity of operations for accomplishment of the
           organization's mission.

      4.   Each employee of the Department is responsible for the
           adequate protection of IT resources within their
           control or possession.

      IT security program responsibilities are assigned to the
      Department and all operating units in line with the
      requirements outlined in section F. below.

10.2  Information Technology System Identification and Planning

      The sensitivity level of all IT systems will be determined
      based on the sensitivity of the data processed or the
      importance of the system to mission accomplishment. All
      systems must include security controls that reflect the true
      importance of the information processed on the system and/or
      the government investment embodied in the components of the
      IT system.  The sensitivity level of all DOC IT systems will
      be identified in one of the following categories:

      1.   Classified National Security Systems contain
           information which requires protection against
           unauthorized disclosure in the interest of national
           security at either the Top Secret, Secret or
           Confidential level.  Procedural protection requirements
           for classified systems are contained in DAO 207-2, "DOC
           National Security Information Manual."  Technical
           protection requirements are contained in Section 10.18
           of the "DOC IT Management Handbook" and Section 18 of
           the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      2.   Unclassified Sensitive Systems include those that
           require some degree of protection for confidentiality,
           integrity or availability.  This includes systems and
           data whose improper use or disclosure could adversely
           affect the ability of an agency to accomplish its
           mission, proprietary data, records about individuals
           requiring protection under the Privacy Act, and data
           not releasable under the Freedom of Information Act. 
           If the system is required for accomplishment of an
           agency mission it need not contain any sensitive data.

      3.   Non-Sensitive Systems are considered "trivial" as they
           contain only public data, which has no protection
           required for confidentiality or integrity, and the
           mission of the agency can be accomplished without the
           system.
  
      A security plan will be prepared in the format of the "DOC
      Guidelines for Developing and Evaluating Security Plans for
      Sensitive and Classified Systems," contained in Section 2 of
      the "DOC IT Security Manual," and submitted to the
      Department for all DOC application and general support
      systems that have been identified as sensitive or classified
      national security systems.  All IT systems will be
      identified as either application systems or general support
      systems.

      1.   Application Systems - Systems that perform clearly
           defined functions for which there are readily
           identifiable security considerations and needs.  Such a
           system might actually comprise many individual
           application programs and hardware, software, and
           telecommunications components.  They can be either a
           major software application or a combination of
           hardware/software where the only purpose of the system
           is to support a specific mission related function.  The
           system may process multiple individual applications, if
           all are related to a single mission function.

      2.   General Support Systems - These consist of hardware and
           software that provide general automated data processing
           or network support for a variety of users and
           applications.  Individual applications may be less
           easily distinguishable than in the previous category. 
           Single user systems, such as one or more personal
           computers may fit into this category if they process
           data related to more than one function.

10.3  Certification

      Certification is a requirement for all sensitive and
      classified DOC general support and application systems.  New
      IT systems or those not fully operational shall complete all
      certification requirements and be accredited prior to full
      implementation.

      Initial Certification

      Prior to accreditation, each IT system is to undergo
      appropriate technical certification evaluations to ensure
      that it meets all federal and DOC policies, regulations and
      standards and that all installed security safeguards appear
      to be adequate and appropriate for the protection
      requirements of the system.  Certification of the system is
      based on the documented results of the design reviews,
      system tests, and the recommendations of the testing teams. 
      All systems must include security controls that reflect the
      true importance of the information processed on the system
      and/or the government investment embodied in the components
      of the IT system.  Section 3 of the "DOC IT Security
      Manual," identifies the required actions in the
      certification process.

      Recertification

      Systems will be recertified when substantial changes are
      made to the system, when changes in requirements result in
      the need to process data of a higher sensitivity, after the
      occurrence of a serious security violation which raises
      questions about the validity of an earlier certification,
      and in any case no less frequent than three years after the
      previous certification.  Examples of major changes are
      contained in Sections 3 and 4 of the "DOC IT Security
      Manual."

10.4  Accreditation

      Accreditation is required for all sensitive and classified
      DOC general support and application systems.  New IT systems
      or those not fully operational shall complete all
      requirements and be accredited prior to full implementation.

      Initial Accreditation

      All sensitive and classified DOC IT general support or
      application systems will be accredited.  The term
      accreditation describes the process whereby information
      pertaining to the security of a system is developed,
      analyzed and submitted for approval to the appropriate
      senior management official identified in this document as
      the Designated Approving Authority (DAA).  Section 4 of the
      "DOC IT Security Manual," identifies the required steps in
      the accreditation process.  The DAA will review the
      accreditation support documentation and either concur,
      thereby declaring that a satisfactory level of operational
      security is present or not concur, indicating that the level
      of risk either has not been adequately defined or reduced to
      an acceptable level for operational requirements.  The DAA
      will sign a formal accreditation statement declaring that
      the system appears to be operating at an acceptable level of
      risk, or defining any conditions or constraints that are
      required for appropriate system protection.  Sample
      accreditation statements are contained in Section 4 of the
      "DOC IT Security Manual."

      Security of classified IT systems operated by, or in support
      of DOC programs is the responsibility of the Department and
      these systems must be accredited in accordance with the
      requirements defined in this policy.  Approvals granted by
      external agencies, i.e., Department of State, Department of
      Defense, Central Intelligence Agency, etc., are not valid
      authority to operate classified IT systems within the
      Department.  Approvals granted to these systems by DOC,
      prior to this policy, are no longer in effect and new
      approval to operate must be granted through the DOC
      accreditation process.        

      Interim Accreditation

      Interim authority to operate can be granted for a fixed
      period of time, not to exceed one year.  This authority is
      based on an approved security plan and is contingent on
      certain conditions being met.  The interim authority to
      operate, while continuing the accreditation process, permits
      the IT system to meet its operational mission requirements
      while improving its IT security posture.  If the DAA is not
      satisfied that the IT system is protected at an acceptable
      level of risk, an interim accreditation can be granted to
      allow time for implementation of additional controls. 
      Recommendation or request for an interim accreditation may
      be made by the IT system owner, the operating unit IT
      Security Officer (ITSO) or the DAA.  Interim authority to
      operate is not a waiver of the requirement for
      accreditation.  The IT system must meet all requirements and
      be fully accredited by the interim accreditation expiration
      date.  No extensions of interim accreditation can be granted
      except by the DOC Director for Information Resources
      Management. 

      Reaccreditation

      Systems will be reaccredited when major changes occur to the
      system or every three years, whichever occurs first. 
      Examples of major changes are contained in Section 4 of the
      "DOC IT Security Manual."

      Prior to reaccreditation, an on-site IT security
      verification review must be conducted by an evaluation team
      under the direction of the DOC IT Security Manager, the
      operating unit ITSO or the ITSO of a subordinate
      organizational unit (i.e., Line Office, Regional Office,
      Laboratory, etc.).  Procedures for conducting IT security
      verification reviews are contained in Section 5 of the "DOC
      IT Security Manual."

10.5  Verification Reviews

      An IT Security verification review will be conducted on all
      DOC sensitive or classified national security IT systems by
      an evaluation team under the direction of the DOC IT
      Security Manager or the operating unit ITSO every three
      years.  The purpose of the IT security verification review
      is to provide a level of review and evaluation independent
      of the system owner, that will verify that adequate and
      appropriate levels of protection are being provided for the
      individual systems, based on their unique protection
      requirements.  At the operating unit level, responsibility
      for conducting IT security verification reviews may be
      delegated to subordinate organizations as long as those
      subordinate organizations do not come under the direct
      control of the system owner.  Detailed guidelines for
      conducting IT security verification reviews are contained in
      Section 5 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

10.6  Incidents and Violations

      All DOC organizations will establish and implement a process
      and procedures to minimize the risk associated with
      violations of IT security, to ensure timely detection and
      reporting of actual or suspected incidents or violations.

      An IT security incident is any event, suspected event, or
      vulnerability that could pose a threat to the integrity,
      availability, or confidentiality of DOC's systems,
      applications or data.  Incidents may result in the
      possession of unauthorized knowledge, the wrongful
      disclosure of information, the unauthorized alteration or
      destruction of data or systems and violation of federal or
      state laws.
      
      If such violations are detected or suspected, they are to be
      reported immediately to the DOC IT Security Manager through
      the operating unit ITSO.  Section 6 of the "DOC IT Security
      Manual contains specific information concerning the
      reporting requirements for IT security violations. 
      
10.6.1 Malicious Software

      All DOC organizations will establish and implement a process
      and procedures to minimize the risk of introducing viruses
      and other malicious software, to ensure timely detection of
      viral infections, to provide procedures for eliminating
      viral infections from the Department's inventory of
      microcomputers (PCs), and to provide procedures to minimize
      the risk from malicious programs to larger systems, or
      systems where virus detection software is not yet available.

      If such violations are detected or suspected, they are to be
      reported immediately to the DOC IT Security Manager through
      the operating unit ITSO.  Information concerning the
      malicious software protection procedures and reporting
      requirements are contained in Section 6.1 of the "DOC IT
      Security Manual."

10.7  Risk Management 

      All DOC organizations will establish and implement a risk
      management process for all IT resources, to ensure that the
      balance of risks, vulnerabilities, threats and
      countermeasures achieves a residual level of risk that is
      acceptable based on the sensitivity or criticality of the
      individual systems.

      System owners shall conduct a periodic risk analysis of each
      IT system to insure that appropriate, cost effective
      safeguards are incorporated into existing and new systems. 
      The objective of the risk analysis is to provide a measure
      of the relative vulnerabilities and threats to an
      installation so that security resources can be effectively
      distributed to minimize the potential for future losses. 
      The risk analysis may vary from an informal, but documented,
      review of a microcomputer or terminal installation to a
      formal, fully quantified risk analysis for a large mainframe
      computer system.  A risk analysis will be performed:

      1.   Prior to the approval of design specifications for new
           systems;

      2.   Whenever a significant change occurs to the system
           (examples of major changes are contained in Sections 3
           and 4 of the "DOC IT Security Manual";) or

      3.   At least every three years.

      Section 7 of the "DOC IT Security Manual" contains specific
      information and guidance concerning the risk management and
      risk analysis requirements. 

10.8  Contingency and Disaster Recovery Planning

      Management officials who are dependent upon IT systems for
      the support of essential functions are responsible for the
      development and maintenance of contingency plans for these
      functions.  The contingency planning process will address
      the following activities:

      1.   Backup and retention of data and software;

      2.   Selection of a backup or alternate operations strategy;

      3.   Emergency response actions to be taken to protect life
           and property and minimize the impact of the emergency;

      4.   Actions to be accomplished to initiate and effect
           backup or alternate site; and

      5.   Resumption of normal operations in the most efficient
           and cost-effective manner.

      Each DOC IT system shall develop and maintain in a current
      state, a contingency plan for disaster recovery which will
      provide reasonable assurance that critical data processing
      support can be continued, or resumed quickly, if normal
      operations of the system are interrupted.  These plans will
      include adequate coverage of:

      1.   Emergency response procedures appropriate to fire,
           flood, civil disorder, natural disaster, bomb threat or
           any other incident or activity which may endanger
           lives, property or the capability to perform essential
           functions.  These emergency procedures will be
           prominently displayed in the areas to which they apply;

      2.   Arrangements, procedures and responsibilities will be
           defined and documented to ensure that essential
           (critical) operations can be continued if normal
           processing or data communications are interrupted for
           any reason for an unacceptable period of time;

      3.   Recovery procedures and responsibilities to facilitate
           the rapid restoration of normal operations at the
           primary site, or if necessary, at a new facility,
           following the destruction, major damage or other
           interruptions at the primary site; and

      4.   The minimally acceptable level of degraded operation of
           the essential (critical) systems or functions will be
           identified and prioritized to guide implementation at
           the backup operational site.  The contingency plan must
           accommodate these priorities.

      The plan for large systems supporting essential Departmental
      or agency functions shall be fully documented.  Small
      systems, such as those located in office environments, may
      develop a more abbreviated and less formal plan.  All plans
      must be operationally tested at a frequency commensurate
      with the risk and magnitude of loss or harm that could
      result from disruption of information processing support,
      but not to exceed one year.  
      
      Section 8 of the "DOC IT Security Manual" contains specific
      information and guidance concerning contingency and disaster
      recovery planning.  

10.9  Personnel Security

      All DOC operating units shall comply with personnel security
      policies and procedures established by the "DOC Personnel
      Security Manual," DAO 207-2 and Section 9 of the "DOC IT
      Security Manual."  These policies pertain to both federal
      and contractor personnel.  At a minimum:

      1.   All IT related positions will be evaluated and assigned
           a sensitivity level and appropriate background
           investigations will be completed for individuals
           filling these positions;

      2.   Procedures will be established to ensure the screening
           of all individuals before they are allowed to
           participate in the design, operation or maintenance of
           sensitive IT systems, or are granted access to
           sensitive data.  The level of screening required should
           vary from minimal checks to full background
           investigations, depending upon the sensitivity of the
           information to be handled and/or the risk and magnitude
           of loss or harm that could be caused by the individual;

      3.   Establish a process to grant access privileges based on
           a legitimate need to have system access.  Individuals
           will be granted only the least possible privileges
           necessary for job performance.  Privileges which have
           not been specifically granted will be specifically
           denied;

      4.   Where feasible, sensitive positions will be separated
           to preclude any one individual from gaining the
           opportunity to adversely affect the system.  Procedural
           checks and balances must be defined and enforced so
           that accountability is established and security
           violations are detectable.

      5.   Establish a process for individual accountability for
           the proper use and security of the IT system(s) being
           accessed and ensure that all users are provided with
           periodic security awareness briefings, copies of system
           rules and are trained to fulfil their IT security
           responsibilities;

      6.   Establish a process to revoke access privileges in a
           timely manner when the requirement for access ceases
           (e.g., transfer, resignation, retirement, change of job
           description, etc.); and

      7.   Establish a process to immediately revoke access
           privileges to individuals being separated for adverse
           reasons on or just prior to notifying them of the
           pending action.
      
10.10      Hardware Security

      DOC operating units shall assure that appropriate technical
      security requirements are included in specifications for the
      acquisition or operation of new IT equipment intended to
      process sensitive information.  These specifications shall
      be reviewed and approved by the appropriate ITSO or IT
      System Security Officer (ITSSO) prior to the acquisition.  

      It may not be feasible or cost effective to retrofit
      existing, older computer hardware.  However, the features
      below should be considered when acquiring new systems, to
      ensure that they are incorporated either within the hardware
      or operating system software:

      1.   User Isolation

           a.    Users will be allowed to access only the memory
                 locations, files, and peripheral devices which
                 have been allocated to the user by the operating
                 system.

           b.    Computers, other than stand-alone PCs, should have
                 the capability to effectively isolate users from
                 each other and from the operating system.

           c.    Physical isolation of the hardware is described in
                 Section 10.11 of this document and Section 11 of
                 the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      2.   System Execution

           a.    Any attempt to execute an illegal instruction
                 should result in a hardware interrupt permitting
                 the operating system to interrupt and abort the
                 program containing the instruction.

           b.    Error detection and memory boundary checking
                 should be performed on transfers of data between
                 memory, peripherals, and external devices.

           c.    Automatic programmed interrupts must control
                 system malfunctions and operator errors.

      For systems that process very sensitive or national security
      information the use of equipment that meets the requirements
      of either the "Department of Defense (DOD) Trusted Computer
      System Evaluation Criteria," DOD 5200.28-STD ("Orange Book")
      or the "Federal Criteria for IT Security," developed jointly
      by the National Institute of Standards and Technology and
      the National Security Agency is encouraged.

      Government owned equipment is for official use only and is
      not to be used for personal business or other non-government
      activities.

      Individual employees should be discouraged from bringing
      their personally owned hardware into DOC space for
      processing government data.  If it is in the best interest
      of the DOC organization to allow the use of personally owned
      hardware on DOC premises, authorization must be granted in
      writing by the immediate supervisor, showing the
      justification.  The written authorization must show that the
      DOC is not responsible for any damage or loss of personally
      owned equipment and will not pay for maintenance or repair. 
      See Section 10.12.1 of this document and Section 12.1 of the
      "DOC IT Security Manual" for additional policies and
      guidance on copyrighted software.

10.11      IT Facility

      Access to IT resources will be based upon demonstrated need
      and level of security clearance, if appropriate. 
      Individuals shall be granted only the access authority
      and/or system privileges necessary to accomplish their
      assigned duties.

      10.11.1     Physical Security

      Adequate physical security measures must be provided for the
      protection of human resources, physical and logical assets
      and sensitive applications and data.  Physical security
      measures must be selected and implemented in consideration
      of the sensitivity of the IT resources and their criticality
      to the supported functions.  The physical security policies
      stated herein are intended to be complementary to the "DOC
      Physical Security Manual," DAO 207-1 and apply to the
      protection of IT resources.

      For the purposes of these policies, controlled areas are
      those which encompass or allow access to potentially
      sensitive information resources, resources which are
      essential for the processing of sensitive data, or resources
      essential to accomplishment of organizational missions. 
      These areas include, but are not limited to:  any spaces
      housing computer equipment, including terminals, PCs and
      file servers; data storage libraries; input/output areas;
      data conversion areas; programmer areas and files;
      documentation libraries; communication equipment areas;
      computer maintenance areas; mechanical equipment areas;
      telephone closets; environmental controls and power systems;
      and supply storage areas.  The physical security
      requirements of controlled areas will be determined by the
      results of a risk analysis and/or a DOC Office of Security
      physical security survey.

      When automation or data communications equipment are located
      within user areas, the user management officials will assess
      the sensitivity of the data, automated resources and
      functions performed and, if warranted, designate the area as
      a controlled area.

      The operational areas of major computer installations,
      including local area network file servers, will be
      designated restricted areas in which access will not be
      permitted unless specifically authorized or required for job
      performance.

      Controlled and restricted areas will be protected by
      physical security and other means which are deemed
      appropriate for the sensitivity or criticality of the system
      as determined by the results of a risk analysis and as
      defined in the Sensitive System Security Plan for the
      system.  At a minimum, access to controlled areas will be
      limited to those individuals having an official need to be
      in the area.

      IT devices which are easily moved, have non-removable hard
      drives and are used for sensitive information will not be
      allowed outside of the controlled area.  If the sensitive
      data remaining on the media has been completely erased or
      obliterated, the removal of these devices from the work area
      may be approved by the ITSO or ITSSO.

      Contract maintenance personnel, and others not authorized
      unrestricted access but who are required to be in the
      controlled area, will be escorted by an authorized person at
      all times that they are within the controlled area.

      Media used to record and store sensitive software or data
      will be externally identified, protected, controlled and
      secured when not in actual use.

10.11.2 Environmental Safeguards

      Adequate environmental safeguards must be installed and
      implemented to protect IT system resources as deemed
      appropriate for the sensitivity or criticality of the system
      as determined by the results of a risk analysis and as
      defined in the Sensitive System Security Plan for the
      system.  At a minimum, the following environmental
      safeguards must be considered:

      1.   Fire prevention, detection, suppression and protection

      2.   Water hazard prevention, detection and correction

      3.   Electric power supply protection

      4.   Temperature control

      5.   Humidity control  

      6.   Natural disaster protection from earthquake, lightning,
           windstorm, etc.

      7.   Magnetism protection

      8.   Good housekeeping procedures for protection against
           dust and dirt 

10.12      Software Security

      Prior to placing a sensitive application into operation, DOC
      operating units will verify that the required user functions
      are being performed completely and correctly, and that the
      specified administrative, technical and physical safeguards
      are operationally adequate and fully satisfy the applicable
      federal policies, regulations and standards relating to the
      protection of the information.

      Application Software - An application which processes
      sensitive data, or requires protection because of the risk
      and magnitude of loss or harm that could result from
      improper operation, manipulation or disclosure must be
      provided protection appropriate to its sensitivity.  The
      following will be considered as the minimum controls to be
      applied to sensitive applications, with additional controls
      or safeguards to be imposed if appropriate:

      1.   Security requirements will be defined, and security
           specifications approved by the user prior to acquiring
           or starting development of applications, or prior to
           making a substantial change in existing applications;

      2.   Design reviews will be conducted at periodic intervals
           during the developmental process to assure that the
           proposed design will satisfy the functional and
           security requirements specified by the user;

      3.   New or substantially modified sensitive applications
           shall be thoroughly tested prior to implementation to
           verify that the user functions and the required
           administrative, technical and physical safeguards are
           present and are operationally adequate.  This is
           normally accomplished as part of the certification
           process described in Section 10.3 of this document and
           Section 3 of the "DOC IT Security Manual";

      4.   Live sensitive data or files will not be used to test
           applications software until software integrity has been
           reasonably assured by testing with non-sensitive data
           or files;

      5.   Sensitive application software will not be placed in a
           production status until the system tests have been
           successfully completed and the application has been
           properly certified and accredited.  Accreditation
           requirements are described in Section 10.4 of this
           document and Section 4 of the "DOC IT Security Manual";

      6.   Current copies of critical application software,
           documentation, data bases and other resources required
           for its operation, will be maintained at a secure off-
           site location to be readily available for use following
           an emergency;

      7.   Sensitive applications will be re-tested and
           recertified every three years or following major
           changes; and 

      8.   Sensitive software documentation should be provided the
           same degree of protection as that provided for the
           software. 

      Operating System Software - The operating system software
      employed to process data by multiple users, including local
      area networks, should control user access to resources and
      capabilities which are required and have been authorized. 
      It should also have the capability to identify, journal,
      report and assign accountability for the functions performed
      or attempted by a user, and to deny user access to
      capabilities or resources which have not been authorized. 
      Since the operating system has the capability to perform
      certain functions which are forbidden to users, it should
      allow the user to have access to the authorized resources
      only, and nothing more.  As a minimum, the operating system:
      

      1.   Should control all transfers between memory and on-line
           storage devices, between a central computer and remote
           devices and between on-line storage devices;

      2.   Should control all operations associated with
           allocating IT system resources (e.g. memory, peripheral
           devices, etc.), memory protection, system interrupts
           and changes between the privileged and non-privileged
           states;

      3.   Should control programs or utilities which may be used
           to maintain and/or modify the operating system, access
           control systems, sensitive databases and other software
           modules which could effect or compromise the integrity
           of the general purpose software or sensitive
           applications;

      4.   Should prevent a user program from executing privileged
           instructions;

      5.   Should isolate the programs and data areas of one user
           from those of other users and the operating system
           software;

      6.   Should assure error detection, when accessing memory,
           memory bounds, parity, and hardware register checking;

      7.   Should cause the following screen warning message to be
           displayed before the log on message, if the system is
           capable of being accessed by communication connection:

           **WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**
           YOU HAVE ACCESSED A UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT COMPUTER. 
           USE OF THIS COMPUTER WITHOUT AUTHORIZATION OR FOR
           PURPOSES FOR WHICH AUTHORIZATION HAS NOT BEEN EXTENDED
           IS A VIOLATION OF FEDERAL LAW AND CAN BE PUNISHED WITH
           FINES OR IMPRISONMENT (PUBLIC LAW 99-474).  REPORT
           SUSPECTED VIOLATIONS TO THE SYSTEM SECURITY OFFICER.
           **WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**

           If equipment or software, capable of monitoring
           keystrokes, is used on the system for any reason, the
           warning screen must be modified to read as follows:

           **WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**
           THIS SYSTEM IS FOR THE USE OF AUTHORIZED USERS ONLY.
           INDIVIDUALS USING THIS COMPUTER SYSTEM WITHOUT
           AUTHORITY, OR IN EXCESS OF THEIR AUTHORITY, ARE SUBJECT
           TO HAVING ALL OF THEIR ACTIVITIES ON THIS SYSTEM
           MONITORED AND RECORDED BY SYSTEM PERSONNEL. IN THE
           COURSE OF MONITORING INDIVIDUALS IMPROPERLY USING THIS
           SYSTEM, OR IN THE COURSE OF SYSTEM MAINTENANCE, THE
           ACTIVITIES OF AUTHORIZED USERS MAY ALSO BE MONITORED.
           ANYONE USING THIS SYSTEM EXPRESSLY CONSENTS TO SUCH
           MONITORING AND IS ADVISED THAT IF SUCH MONITORING
           REVEALS POSSIBLE EVIDENCE OF CRIMINAL ACTIVITY, SYSTEM
           PERSONNEL MAY PROVIDE THE EVIDENCE OF SUCH MONITORING
           TO LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.  REPORT SUSPECTED
           VIOLATIONS TO THE SYSTEM SECURITY OFFICER.
           **WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**WARNING**

           The user should then be prompted for a specific
           response to continue or exit the system;

      8.   Should be maintained by the minimum number of
           authorized persons; and

      9.   Should be copied after each modification with the copy
           to be immediately stored at a secure off-site location
           for emergency use.

      Other General Purpose Software - Other general purpose or
      utility software may be executed by both users and the
      operating system.  Many of these perform routine, but
      important functions for the users.  Others have the
      capability to by-pass controls, access databases without
      approval, duplicate files, change or reveal passwords and
      similar actions which, if used improperly, can compromise
      the protection of system resources.  These latter programs
      and utilities should be safeguarded by:

      1.   Password protecting those which are only required by,
           or should be reserved for, the exclusive use of system
           programmers;

      2.   Password protecting and restricting access to utilities
           required to maintain security files;

      3.   Limiting the utility instructions to operators and
           others not having need for these capabilities;

      4.   Limiting user privileges for utility and general
           purpose programs to "execute only" (except for systems
           programmers who need additional privileges);

      5.   Maintaining a current copy of utilities, general
           purpose programs and documentation at a properly
           secured off-site location for emergency use; and

      6.   Protecting proprietary software in accordance with the
           terms and conditions of the contract or license.

10.12.1 Copyrighted Software

      Title 17, United States Code, Section 106 gives copyright
      owners exclusive rights to reproduce and distribute their
      material, and Section 504 states that copyright infringers
      can be held liable for damages to the copyright owner. 
      Title 18, United States Code provides felony penalties for
      software copyright infringement.

      It is the responsibility of each DOC employee and supervisor
      to protect the government's interests as they perform their
      duties.  This includes responsibility for assuring that
      commercial software, acquired by the government, is used
      only in accordance with licensing agreements.  Likewise, it
      is also their responsibility to assure that any proprietary
      software is properly licensed before being installed on DOC
      equipment.  This policy does not apply to software developed
      by or for a federal agency and no restrictions apply to its
      use or distribution within the federal government.  

      Supervisors will ensure that the following requirements are
      made known to all employees and will be held accountable for
      conducting periodic audits to ensure that these policies are
      being followed:

      1.   Install only commercial software, including shareware,
           that has been purchased through the government
           procurement process on DOC systems;

      2.   Follow all provisions of the license agreements issued
           with the software and register organizational
           ownership;

      3.   Do not make any illegal copies of copyrighted software. 
           Normally the license will allow a single copy to be
           made for archival purposes.  If the license is for 
           multiple users, do not exceed the authorized number of
           copies;  

      4.   At least annually, an inventory of all software on each
           individual PC will be audited against the
           organization's license agreement records to ensure that
           no illegal copies of commercial software are installed
           on any equipment.

      5.   Maintain written records of software installed on each
           machine and ensure that a license or other proof of
           ownership is on file for each piece of software; 

      6.   Store licenses, software manuals and procurement
           documentation in a secure location (i.e., closed file
           cabinet, etc.);

      7.   When upgrades to software are purchased, the old
           version should be disposed of in accordance with the
           licensing agreement to avoid a potential violation. 
           Upgraded software is considered a continuation of the
           original license, not an additional license;

      8.   Some government owned software licenses do allow
           employees to take copies home for use on their
           personally owned computers under specific circumstances
           (e.g., for government work but not personal business). 
           Unless the license specifically states that employees
           may take copies of software home for installation on
           home computers, doing so is a violation of the
           copyright law and the individual will be liable.  

      9.   All illegal copies of software will be deleted
           immediately.

      All organizations must acquire special purpose software to
      inventory and document all software on all PCs belonging to
      the organization.  This special purpose software may be a
      commercial product or the organization may acquire free
      software produced by the Software Publishers Association for
      this purpose from their operating unit ITSO.  

      Individual employees should be discouraged from installing 
      their personally owned software on government equipment.  If
      it is in the best interest of the DOC organization to allow
      personally owned software, authorization must be granted in
      writing by the immediate supervisor, showing the
      justification.  Prior to authorization, the employee must
      provide the software license and give assurance that
      copyright infringement will not occur from installation on
      government equipment.  Employees not following these
      procedures shall be held personally liable for any
      violations of the copyright laws and subject to the
      penalties contained in Title 17 and Title 18 of the United
      States Code.

10.13      Production Input/Output Controls

      Policies and procedures will be established to protect
      sensitive information from either accidental, unauthorized
      or intentional modification, destruction or disclosure
      during input, processing or output operations.

      The handling of sensitive input data will be limited to
      properly screened persons, and will be controlled by formal
      procedures which will provide an audit trail of the data as
      it passes from person to person or point to point in the
      process.  The audit trail must assure personal
      accountability from initial receipt to distribution or
      destruction of the final products.

      Procedures must be established to ensure that only
      authorized users pick up or deliver sensitive input and
      output data and media.  Procedures for sensitive information
      should include such controls as  signed receipts, registered
      mail and locked or monitored user "boxes".

      Printouts, containers, tape reels, disk packs, floppy disks
      and similar data storage media should be clearly identified
      as to contents and sensitivity.  The purpose of this is to
      prevent accidental release for reuse, inadvertent disclosure
      of sensitive information and to notify the users of the need
      for continuous protection.  Classified information should be
      labeled and protected as specified in the "DOC National
      Security Information Manual."

      Subject to the capabilities of the system, inadvertent
      destruction (e.g., overwriting) should be prevented by the
      use of "write protect" rings, internal labels, floppy disk
      tabs or similar safeguards.  Operator instructions for each
      application should clearly specify the actions to be taken
      in the event of inadvertent damage or destruction, as well
      as incidents which cause physical damages to the media.

      All sensitive and/or critical data stored on media such as
      magnetic tape, disk, and similar devices, should be stored
      and controlled in the media library when not required for
      processing.  Only authorized and properly screened
      individuals will be allowed entry to the library.  Controls
      should be in place to assure that these individuals can be
      held accountable for data resources under their control.  In
      addition to the library, sensitive data may only be stored
      in an authorized, secure off-site location or temporarily in
      the computer area during processing.  Procedural
      instructions, inventories and audit trails will be
      implemented to assure that these controls are in place and
      are effective.  If a media library is not justified, as in
      the case of a PC, the sensitive diskettes and tapes should
      be stored in a locked safe or cabinet with all other
      controls in place.

      Section 10.19 of this document and Section 19 of the "DOC IT
      Security Manual" describe the approved methods of clearing
      and/or declassifying storage media which has been used for
      classified national security information.  Sensitive, but
      unclassified data will be handled as follows:

      1.   Using "delete" or "erase" features usually do not
           remove the data from the media, and does not assure
           that the data cannot be retrieved by more sophisticated
           devices.  This process can be used when the media is to
           remain under control of the original data owner, and
           will be subsequently used to store or process
           information of the same or lower sensitivity.  It is
           important to note that "delete" routines that only
           remove pointers and leave the data intact are not
           acceptable methods for clearing sensitive data if the
           media is to be released outside of the original data
           owner's control.

      2.   If the media containing sensitive information is to be
           released outside the original owner's control or is to
           be used for non-sensitive data and will not be in a
           controlled environment, it should be cleared by
           overwriting each memory location, register and other
           circuity used for storing sensitive information before
           it is reused. Afterwards, verify that all appropriate
           memory locations have been cleared.  Section 13 of the
           "DOC IT Security Manual" contains specific guidance for
           clearing and overwriting sensitive data.

10.14      Acquisition and External Processing Requirements

      The federal IT security policies are applicable for IT
      systems regardless of whether the services are performed
      within DOC, by another Government agency, or by a non-
      Government agency.  However, in the latter two situations,
      the agency would not be under the operational management
      control of DOC and must be treated somewhat differently.

      Procurement or other documents used to acquire or operate IT
      installations, equipment, software, and related resources or
      services shall contain specifications to assure that
      appropriate technical, administrative, personnel and
      physical security requirements are included.  The specified
      security requirements will be reviewed and approved by the
      appropriate ITSSO who must certify that the specified
      security requirements are reasonably sufficient for the
      intended use, and that they satisfy current federal, DOC
      laws, regulations and policies.

      Processing by Another Government Agency - All Government
      agencies are required to adhere to the IT security policies
      contained in the "Computer Security Act," P.L. 100-235 and
      OMB Circular A-130, unless more stringent policies or
      regulations apply.  Other federal agencies may implement
      these requirements somewhat differently than Commerce, but
      they must adhere to the policy that sensitive applications
      will only be processed on IT systems having appropriate
      security protection, after the systems have been certified
      and accredited by senior officials of the organization. 
      When DOC processing is done by another agency, the
      sensitivity of the data and application will be determined
      by a DOC official.  The certification of the application is
      the responsibility of the agency owning the application.  If
      the application is not a DOC application, the owning agency
      must provide a copy of the certification to the Department. 
      In such a case, compliance with the federal IT security
      policies will be accomplished as follows:

      1.   The DOC data or application owner is responsible for
           determining the sensitivity of the data and/or
           application and making this known to the servicing
           agency.

      2.   The servicing agency personnel who will have access to
           the sensitive DOC resources must be screened in
           accordance with the Federal Personnel Manual and the
           servicing agency equivalent to the "DOC Personnel
           Security Manual."  Servicing agreements will specify
           that personnel will be screened and appropriate
           clearances granted before allowing access to DOC
           sensitive resources.

      3.   The DOC senior official empowered to certify the
           sensitive application, if it belonges to DOC, will
           request the servicing agency to provide the
           certification and backup documentation.  Based on the
           information provided, the official may choose to
           certify, not certify, or certify for operation under
           certain specified conditions.

      4.   The servicing agreement must state clearly that the
           application or system has been certified and that the
           servicing organization has achieved, and will maintain,
           a level of security commensurate with the sensitivity
           of the data being processed for the DOC.  

      5.   The agreement must state that the application or system
           must be recertified every three years or earlier if
           substantial modifications have been made to the
           application or system.  A copy of the recertification
           will be provided to the DOC data or application owner.

      6.   The agreement must specify that the servicing 
           organization will develop and maintain a Disaster
           Recovery Plan which includes sensitive DOC applications
           and data.

      Processing by a Non-Government Agency - When a contractor or
      other non-Government organization is processing DOC work,
      the contract must specify adherence to DOC IT security
      policies and the National Industrial Security Program as
      outlined in Executive Order 12829 for classified processing. 
      In addition:

      1.   Before entering into an agreement to process sensitive
           data or applications at a contractor facility, a risk
           analysis must be performed, and approved by DOC
           personnel.  A new risk analysis must be performed
           whenever significant changes to the system occur or
           every three years, whichever occurs first.

      2.   DOC sensitive applications must be certified and
           recertified, as specified in Section 3 above, for
           operation at the contractor facility.  Section 3 of the
           "DOC IT Security Manual" identifies the required
           actions in the certification process.

      3.   The servicing contract should specify that DOC reserves
           the right to perform unannounced on-site inspections to
           insure that an adequate level of security is being
           maintained.

      4.   Monitoring contractor compliance will be the
           responsibility of the DOC Contracting Officer's
           Technical Representative (COTR), in coordination with
           the appropriate procurement and IT security officers,
           and the DOC owner of the data or application.

      Section 14 of the "DOC IT Security Manual" contains specific
      information and guidance concerning IT acquisition security
      requirements and external IT processing services.  

Section 10.15    Telecommunications Security
                 (Policy is being developed)

Section 10.16    Technical Controls
                 (Policy is being developed)

10.17      Security Awareness and Training

      Operating units shall establish IT security awareness and
      training programs to assure that federal and contractor
      personnel involved in the management, operation,
      programming, maintenance or use of IT are aware of their
      security responsibilities and know how to fulfill them.

      All new employees will receive an IT security awareness
      briefing as part of their orientation within 60 days of
      their appointment and all employees will be provided with
      refresher awareness material or briefings at least annually. 
        
      IT security training above the awareness level shall be
      provided to personnel who design, implement or maintain
      systems regarding the types of security and internal control
      techniques that should be incorporated into system
      development, operations and maintenance.

      Individuals assigned responsibilities for IT security shall
      be provided with in-depth training regarding security
      techniques, methodologies for evaluating threats and
      vulnerabilities that affect specific IT systems and
      applications and selection and implementation of controls
      and safeguards.


10.18      Procedural Security

      To reduce the potential for compromise, loss or the
      unauthorized modification of critical or sensitive IT
      resources or data, procedures should be established to
      formalize the work flow process and provide the procedural
      protection determined by the data owner to be appropriate. 
      Such procedures are particularly important for office
      environments, since a relatively new and powerful processing
      capability has been placed into the hands of persons who
      frequently have had little experience or training in IT
      security matters.

      Standard procedures define the authorized actions to be
      performed in different circumstances and are invaluable for
      training new employees, to avoid unintentional problems or
      to recover from these problems if they should occur.  They
      also allow the manager to detect procedural deviations which
      could signal the need for corrective actions ranging from
      additional training to disciplinary action.  Formal
      procedures should be developed with these objectives in
      mind.

Section 10.19    Classified National Security Systems
                 (Policy is being developed)

F.    Responsibilities and Process
       
      Department Level

      The Director for Information Resources Management (IRM) is
      responsible for information while being processed and/or
      transmitted electronically, and for the security of the
      resources associated with these functions.  The Director for
      IRM is the Designated Approving Authority (DAA) for all IT
      systems processing classified national security information
      within the Department.  This authority cannot be delegated. 
      The Director for IRM will monitor, evaluate and report, as
      required, to the Assistant Secretary for Administration on
      the status of IT security within the Department and the
      adequacy of operating unit IT Security programs.  Within
      IRM, the authority to perform these responsibilities, except
      DAA for classified systems, will be exercised by the
      Departmental IT Security Manager.

      The DOC IT Security Manager monitors, evaluates and reports,
      as required, to the Director for IRM on the status of IT
      security within the Department and the adequacy of the
      programs administered by the operating units.  The DOC IT
      Security Manager will:

      1.   Develop policies, procedures and guidance establishing,
           implementing, maintaining and overseeing requirements
           for the Department's IT security program to be followed
           by all DOC organizations.

      2.   Provide guidance and technical assistance to operating
           units, including analyzing, evaluating and approving
           all IT system security plans and requirements for IT
           systems security.

      3.   Assure DOC IT security oversight through compliance
           reviews of operating units and organizations and IT
           security verification reviews of individual systems and
           by participating in Commerce program management
           oversight processes.

      4.   Maintain a tracking system and records concerning
           implementation of the required controls and
           accreditation status of all DOC IT systems.

      5.   Establish an IT Security Coordinating Committee and
           chair regularly scheduled meetings to discuss and
           disseminate information on IT security matters and
           concerns.

      6.   Coordinate the review of all controls for classified IT
           systems by the Office of Security and the
           Telecommunications Management Division and evaluate the
           adequacy of all technical controls for accreditation.  

      7.   Act as the central point of contact for the Department
           for IT security related incidents or violations. 
           Investigate or cause to be investigated any incidents
           or violations, maintain records and prepare reports,
           disseminate information concerning potential threats
           and report to the Office of Security any violations
           that come under their area of responsibilities or to
           the Assistant Inspector General for Investigations any
           activity which may constitute a violation of law or
           otherwise is reportable to that office in accordance
           with DAO 207-10, "Inspector General Investigations."

      8.   Coordinate with the Department's Office of Security on
           security matters of mutual interest.





      Operating Unit Level

      Senior IRM Official - Each operating unit Senior IRM
      Official shall conduct an IT security program that ensures
      appropriate and adequate levels of protection for all IT
      systems within the operating unit.  The Senior IRM official
      shall:

      1.   Be the DAA for all sensitive systems within their
           organization.  This approval authority may only be
           delegated to a senior management official of a
           subordinate organizational unit, if that official does
           not have direct control over the IT system being
           accredited.  Delegation of accreditation authority must
           be requested and approved in advance by the DOC
           Director for IRM.

      2.   Assure ownership is assigned for all IT resources
           within the operating unit (i.e., hardware, software,
           data, telecommunications, etc.).
 
      3.   Appoint an ITSO and alternate for the operating unit. 
           This individual, or alternate, should have the staff
           responsibility for the operating unit IT security
           program.  

      Operating Unit ITSO - The operating unit ITSO shall serve as
      the central point of contact for the operating unit IT
      security program with the Departmental IT Security Manager. 
      The operating unit ITSO shall perform the following
      functions:

      1.   Represent the operating unit as a voting member of the
           DOC IT Security Coordinating Committee, attend
           regularly scheduled meetings to obtain current
           information on issues relating to federal or DOC IT
           security policies, regulations, guidelines, share
           information with the committee about issues or concerns
           and participate in special subcommittees working to
           solve Department-wide issues.

      2.   Ensure that an ITSO and alternate are appointed for
           each major subordinate organizational component within
           the operating unit, if appropriate.  These individuals
           will serve as the point of contact for their
           organizational component IT security program with the
           operating unit ITSO.

      3.   Establish and maintain a list of all IT systems within
           the operating unit and provide an up-to-date list to
           the DOC IT Security Manager annually.

      4.   Ensure that an ITSSO has been appointed for each IT
           system within the operating unit.

      5.   Ensure IT security plans are prepared in the proper
           format for all sensitive and classified IT systems
           owned and operated by the operating unit.  Review and
           comment on individual IT security plans, ensuring that
           all corrective actions are completed and submit all
           plans to the DOC IT Security Manager.  Requirements for
           IT security plans are contained in Section 10.2 of this
           document and Section 2 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      6.   Ensure that risk analysis is completed for all
           sensitive or classified IT systems within the operating
           unit.  Requirements for risk analysis are contained in
           Section 10.7 of this document and Section 7 of the "DOC
           IT Security Manual."

      7.   Ensure that contingency and disaster recovery plans are
           developed for all sensitive or classified IT systems
           within the operating unit.  Requirements for
           contingency and disaster recovery planning are
           contained in Section 10.8 of this document and Section
           8 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      8.   Maintain a tracking system concerning implementation of
           the required controls and accreditation status for all
           operating unit sensitive and classified IT systems.

      9.   Act as the central point of contact for accreditation
           of all sensitive IT systems within the operating unit. 
           Ensure that all certification requirements have been
           met for each system, prior to accreditation. 
           Certification requirements are contained in Section
           10.3 of this document and Section 3 of the "DOC IT
           Security Manual." The ITSO will submit an accreditation
           status report quarterly to the DOC IT Security Manager. 
           Accreditation requirements are contained in Section
           10.4 of this document and Section 4 of the "DOC IT
           Security Manual."

      10.  Conduct, or cause to be conducted, IT security
           verification reviews of all operating unit sensitive IT
           systems every three years.  Requirements for IT
           security verification reviews are contained in Section
           10.5 of this document and Section 5 of the "DOC IT
           Security Manual."

      11.  Ensure that all operating unit personnel are provided
           appropriate IT security awareness and training.  IT
           security awareness and training requirements are
           contained in Section 10.17 of this document and Section
           17 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      12.  Act as the central point of contact for the operating
           unit for any type of IT security related incidents or
           violations.  Investigate or cause to be investigated
           any incidents or violations, maintain records and
           ensure  reports are submitted to the DOC IT Security
           Manager and disseminate information concerning
           potential threats to system owners.  Requirements for
           incident and violation reporting are contained in
           Section 10.5 of this document and Section 5 of the "DOC
           IT Security Manual." 

      13.  Ensure that the operating unit has a malicious software
           policy in place and the required virus detection and
           elimination software and procedures are available to
           protect against these threats.  Malicious software
           protection and reporting requirements are contained in
           Section 10.6.1 of this document and Section 6.1 of the
           "DOC IT Security Manual."

      14.  Ensure that the operating unit has established a policy
           against the illegal duplication of copyrighted
           software.  Ensure that all systems are audited for
           illegal software at least annually and inventories of
           all software on each individual system is maintained to
           verify that only legal copies of software are being
           used.  Requirements for software copyright protection,
           auditing and reporting are contained in Section 10.12.1
           of this document and Section 12.1 of the "DOC IT
           Security Manual."
  
      15.  Coordinate with the operating unit Security Office on
           security matters of mutual interest.
  
      In the absence of the ITSO the alternate shall perform all
      functions normally assigned to the ITSO for the operating
      unit IT security program.

      Subordinate Organization ITSO - Not all operating units
      within the Department will require this level position.  A
      major subordinate organization is defined to mean any large
      organizational component that has management responsibility
      for a number of individual IT systems performing separate
      functions (i.e., Line Office, Laboratory, Regional Office). 
      The subordinate organization ITSO shall serve as the central
      point of contact for the subordinate organization IT
      security program with the operating unit ITSO.  If this
      level of position is determined to be appropriate for the
      operating unit, the functions of the ITSO for the
      subordinate organization generally parallel those specified
      for the ITSO. 

      System Owner - Responsibility for the protection of IT
      resources generally falls into two broad categories:
      custodial and owner.  The fulfillment of the protection
      responsibilities of each is mandatory.

      1.   All information resources (hardware, software,
           facilities, data and telecommunications) will be
           assigned to an owner, designated in writing to the
           Senior IRM Official of the operating unit.  For
           example, the "owner" of the resources contained within
           a general support system may be the manager of that
           facility.  Resources located within user areas (i.e.,
           offices or laboratories) may be "owned" by the manager
           of those areas.  To assist with the determination of
           ownership, individual system boundaries must be
           established.  A system is identified by logical
           boundaries being drawn around the various processing,
           communications, storage and related resources.  They
           must be under the same direct management control with
           essentially the same function, reside in the same
           environment and have the same characteristics and
           security needs.  Each system will be designated either
           a general support system or an application system. 
           Chapter 10.2 of this document and Section 2 of the "DOC
           IT Security Manual" contain definitions for general
           support and application systems.

      2.   Ownership of information and/or information processing
           resources may be assigned to an organization,
           subordinate functional element, a position , or a
           specific individual.  When ownership is assigned to an
           organizational or functional element, the head of the
           unit so designated shall be considered the resource
           owner.  Some, but not necessarily all factors to be
           considered in the determination of ownership are: 

           (a)   The originator or creator of data.

           (b)   The organization or individual with the greatest
                 functional interest.

           (c)   Physical possession of the resource.

      3.   Some general support system owners are suppliers of
           data processing services for applications owned by
           other organizations.  Typically these systems are
           custodians of software, data, input and output produced
           by the data processing facility to support one or more
           application owners.  Custodial responsibility includes
           the obligation to comply with applicable security
           policies and directives, and to administer application
           owner specified controls and safeguards for the data
           and programs of those owners.  Many of the Department's
           local area networks will fit into this category.

      4.   Each system owner shall be responsible to:

           (a)   Determine the sensitivity of the resources for
                 which responsible.

           (b)   Determine the appropriate level of security
                 required which is consistent with federal and DOC
                 laws, regulations and directives and the
                 protection requirements of the system for
                 confidentiality, integrity or available and ensure
                 that an adequate level of protection is
                 maintained.

           (c)   Be the certifying official and complete all
                 required certification actions, issue a
                 certification statement and prepare an
                 accreditation package which will be forwarded to
                 the DAA for formal accreditation of the system,
                 every three years or when major changes occur to
                 the system, whichever is less.  If the certifying
                 official is at a higher level in the organization,
                 the system owner will complete all required
                 certification actions and forward the
                 accreditation package to the certifying official,
                 who will issue the certification statement.
                 Chapter 10.3 of this document and Section 3 of the
                 "DOC IT Security Manual" contain certification
                 requirements.

           (d)   Monitor compliance, and periodically re-evaluate
                 previously specified levels of sensitivity and
                 protection.

           (e)   Ensure that all systems are audited for illegal
                 software at least annually and inventories of all
                 software on each individual system is maintained
                 to verify that only legal copies of software are
                 being used.  Requirements for software copyright
                 protection, auditing and reporting are contained
                 in Section 10.12.1 of this document and Section
                 12.1 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

           (f)   Ensure that each automated data processing
                 position (including contract positions) are
                 properly designated in accordance with position
                 sensitivity criteria and receive appropriate
                 investigative processing.  Refer to Section 9 of
                 the "DOC IT Security Manual" and the "DOC
                 Personnel Security Manual" for further guidance.

           (g)   Appoint an individual to serve as the ITSSO with
                 responsibility to develop, implement and manage
                 the security of the system.

      ITSSO - The ITSSO for each classified or sensitive system
      shall perform the following functions:

      1.   Advise the IT system owner on matters pertaining to IT
           systems security.

      2.   Develop, implement and manage the execution of the IT
           system security program.

      3.   Prepare, or cause to be prepared an IT system security
           plan in the proper format for the IT system. 
           Requirements for IT security plans are contained in
           Chapter 10.2 of this document and Section 2 of the "DOC
           IT Security Manual."

      4.   Conduct, or cause to be conducted, a risk analysis on
           the system when there are major changes to the system
           or every three years, whichever is less.  Requirements
           for risk analysis are contained in Chapter 10.7 of this
           document and Section 7 of the "DOC IT Security Manual."

      5.   Ensure that contingency and disaster recovery plans are
           developed, maintained in an up-to-date condition and
           tested at least annually.  Requirements for contingency
           and disaster recovery plans are contained in Chapter
           10.8 of this document and Section 8 of the "DOC IT
           Security Manual."

      6.   Establish and maintain liaison with any remote
           facilities or users served by the IT system, the
           operating unit ITSO, or if appropriate, the subordinate
           organization ITSO.

      7.   Monitor changes in hardware, software,
           telecommunications, facilities and user requirements to
           ensure that security is not compromised or degraded.

      8.   Exercise system responsibility or direct activities for
           password management and control.

      9.   Arrange for IT security awareness training for the
           system staff and monitor the user training programs to
           ensure that personnel receive security orientation
           before being allowed access to sensitive IT resources.

      10.  Ensure that positions requiring access to classified
           information or resources are identified and that
           incumbents of these positions receive an appropriate
           level of security clearance before access is granted.

      11.  Investigate or cause to be investigated known or
           suspected security incidents or violations and prepare
           reports of findings as required in Chapter 10.6 of this
           document and Section 6 of the "DOC IT Security Manual. 
           Verbal and written reports will be made to the
           operating unit ITSO through the subordinate ITSO, if
           appropriate.  Incidents involving a physical security
           violation, such as theft or violations of the personnel
           security, classified information or industrial security
           programs will be referred to the operating unit Office
           of Security for investigation.

      12.  Ensure that the organization abides by the DOC and
           operating unit malicious software policies and has the
           required virus detection and elimination software and
           procedures available to protect against these threats. 
           Malicious software protection and reporting
           requirements are contained in Chapter 10.6.1 of this
           document and Section 6.1 of the "DOC IT Security
           Manual."

      13.  Audit all the systems within the organization for
           illegal software at least annually and maintain
           inventories of all software on each individual system
           to verify that only legal copies of software are being
           used.  Requirements for software Copyright protection,
           auditing and reporting are contained in Section 10.12.1
           of this document and Section 12.1 of the "DOC IT
           Security Manual."

      14.  Review IT related procurement specifications for
           hardware, software or services to ensure that they
           include adequate security requirements and/or
           specifications which are commensurate with the
           sensitivity of the system.

      15.  Conduct, or cause to be conducted, all activities
           required for the certification of the system, including
           preparing the certification and accreditation packages
           for final approval every three years or when major
           changes occur to the system, whichever is less.

      16.  Coordinate with the operating unit Security Office or
           local Security Office on security matters of mutual
           interest.

      User Level - The primary purpose of IT systems is to support
      the missions of using organizations.  User management bears
      a great deal of responsibility for their systems and data. 
      In addition to defining the functions to be performed by the
      system, and its security requirements, the user is directly
      responsible for the system resources, such as terminals and
      printers, located within the user areas.  In order to assure
      adequate security within the user areas where these
      resources are located, user managers will appoint a user
      ITSSO to be responsible for the IT security within the user
      area.  This individual is responsible for implementing and
      enforcing the security program at the user's location.  The
      functions of the user ITSSO generally parallel those
      specified for the ITSSO.

      Each employee of the Department is responsible for the
      adequate protection of IT resources within their control or
      possession and for abiding by all DOC IT security policies.

G.    Relationship with Other Security Programs

      The Office of Security is responsible for: (1) physical
      security of facilities and equipment external to computers
      or telecommunication lines; (2) all procedural matters
      relating to national security information; (3) matters
      relating to background and security clearance investigations
      of personnel; and (4) national emergency planning.  For
      policies relating to these areas, refer to the appropriate
      Departmental directives, i.e., DAO 207- series.

      The Office of the Inspector General provides independent
      oversight through audit and evaluation of the Department's
      IT security program in accordance with the "Inspector
      General's Act of 1978."  For policies relating to these
      areas, refer to the appropriate Departmental directives,
      i.e., DAO 207-10.
