Subject: New Code in France - heavy penalties for "computer crime" 
Date: Fri Mar 11 16:04 1994
From: PS243@calvacom.fr (Pascal SCHMITT)
Subject: New Code in France

Brief information about the articles dealing with computer crimes 
in the new french Code:

Art 323 1 to 7 deal with automated data systems infractions
Illegal ccess or maintain in all or part of a system is punished by one year of 
jail and 100,000FF.

If by doing so data are suppressed or altered, or system functionning is 
altered, 2 years and 2OO,OOOFF.

Illegal Introduction of data or suppression/modification of data : 3 years 
(same as unvoluntarily homicide) and 3OO,OOOFF.

Participation in a group formed to prepare the above infractions = same 
punishments.

Individual persons having committed the above crimes also risk :
- five year interdiction of civil rights and family rights.
- five year interdiction of their on-going professionnal activity, and to
  have any state-related functions.
- confiscation of the goods allowing the infraction
- Closing for five years of his companies
- exclusion from national markets
- Interdiction of making checks (except those to pay the victim)
 
Attempts to those crimes are punished in the same way.
 
Another article 411-9, dealing with sabotage also says that any attempt to 
destroy or to steal documents and equipment of all sorts, including computer 
systems, which could cause any trouble to the nation's security, is punished by 
15 years of jail and 1,500,000FF.
 
Article 421-1 (terrorism crimes) states that robbery, extortions,
degradations, and computer systems infractions, aiming at disturbing the
national order, are considered as terrorist actions and punished by 15
years of jail and 1,5OO,OOOFF.
 
As I want to publish an article on this subject, I would like to know of
US and other countries' regulations. And where I could find them.
 
Christine PS 
243@calvacom.fr
 

[I made minor edits to remove extraneous personal-mail stuff, and for
readbility, mostly insterting some blank lines and correcting a few typos.
- mech@eff.org]
