 This story appeared on Network World Fusion at
 http://www.nwfusion.com/news/1999/0316security.html.


 Sound the alarm!
 IETF working group seeks to improve security alerting. 

 By Sandra Gittlen
 Network World Fusion, 03/16/99

 MINNEAPOLIS - An IETF working group has stepped up work
 on a protocol for broadcasting alerts of network breaches across
 proprietary security applications.

 The Intrusion Detection Message Exchange Protocol (IDMEP)
 would let applications - and system managers - quickly share
 information about attacks, according to IDMEP working group
 members. They are meeting here as part of an overall IETF
 conference.

 "[IDMEP] will be useful for attacks launched from one domain to
 another," says working group attendee Brian Tung, a computer
 scientist at the University of Southern California's Information
 Sciences Institute. "If a source domain notices an attack, it can
 notify the destination network. Right now, that's done by a
 human."

 The group had met last year at the IETF meeting in Orlando, but
 was unsuccessful in gaining consensus and had to revamp its
 plans. This time, meeting attendees seemed encouraged by the
 group's efforts.

 With the protocol, which could be based on SNMP Version 3, an
 alert detailing the type of attack in progress will be automatically
 sent across the network, along with a reference, such as a URL
 or a system file, where the network manager can find further
 information. That information could be the threshold setting of
 the alerter's system letting the recipient know what the alerter
 considers an attack or what the alerter suggests as a response
 for such an attack.

 Mark Wood, product line manager at Internet Security Systems
 in Atlanta, says IDMEP could dramatically improve responses
 to attacks because networks will be sharing information, not
 duplicating efforts.

 In fact, Tung says that hooking the IDMEP to policy networks
 could let users set up automatic responses to alerts and,
 therefore, ward them off.

 "There are a number of dollars to be had in [the intrusion
 detection tools] market," says Stuart Staniford-Chen, co-chair
 of the working group. In fact, the projected market for intrusion
 detection tools is expected to be $200 million, according to
 analysts at the Aberdeen Group, a Boston consultancy.
 "Therefore, we need to get moving on this [protocol]."

 Wood says he expects the protocol to be completed by the
 middle of next year, but products based on a proposed standard
 could be released as early as the first quarter of next year. Cisco
 and Axent are also working on the protocol.
