
   Reducing "Human Factor" Mistakes 

   Date: Jul 23, 2003
   Author: Dancho Danchev
   Nowadays companies and organizations face the problem where massive
   attempts at illegal intrusions hit their network on a daily basis. In
   spite of the latest technological improvements in security, it's still
   the network users who are often unknowingly inviting security breaches
   through carelesnes and a lack of awareness. This paper will try to
   summarize various mistakes done by system administrators, company
   executives and of course the end users, and will also provide you with
   useful strategies that will definitely help you reduce or completely
   eliminate the mistakes.

   Nowadays companies and organizations face the problem where massive
   attempts at illegal intrusions hit their network on a daily basis.
   Whether successful or not, they still pose a significant threat to the
   proper functionality and continuity of the institution's processes.
   The majority of these institutions tend to think that any future
   security related implementations would cost too much effort and
   resources and place a burden on the budget. On the other hand, the
   constant media reports of large and well-known corporations broken
   into really discourage them.

   In spite of the latest technological improvements, it's still us,
   those interacting and configuring these devices/programs; it's our
   staff members, the ones unknowingly contributing to the dissemination
   of malicious code, to the exposure of sensitive or classified business
   information.

   This paper will try to summarize various mistakes done by System
   Administrators, Company Executives and of course the end users, and
   will also provide you with useful strategies that will definitely help
   you reduce or completely eliminate the mistakes.

   The Top 5 System Administrator Mistakes
   System Administrators are those mainly responsible for the continued
   operation of your computers and for the proper functionality of your
   network, however in most of the organizations these people are also
   responsible for the Security of the devices, the detection of
   potential intrusions and securing the organization's network. Taking a
   lot of responsibilities increases the number of potential mistakes by
   the individual due to the stress and the constant work on several
   issues simultaneously. Here I'll review the most common mistakes done
   by System Administrators which could somehow endanger your
   organization and the sensitive data you're holding.

   1. The lack of a well established Personal Security Policy

   Believe it or not, most of the average System Administrators don't
   have a personal Security Policy covering important issues like
   Physical Security of the terminal, the chaotic way a system's software
   is being updated and the way that new patches are applied. Even the
   big and well-known companies suffer from the fact that some of their
   systems are not patched as soon as a new bug is discovered, another
   proof of the importance of this issue.

   Sometimes the Administrator isn't even aware of the latest
   vulnerabilities discovered, which could lead to a potential security
   breach within the organization. Security is a never-ending process
   that requires constant monitoring of new threats and technologies.
   Although most of the Administrators are not Security Experts they
   should continue to learn about new and much more powerful methods to
   protect and secure their networks, while on the other hand increase
   their competitiveness. Nowadays those having some sort of Security
   certification or extended knowledge in the Information Security field
   are usually a step ahead of those whose skills are up to networking
   only. Below I've tried to summarize various recommendations and tips
   for improving the Security of your terminal, organization and broaden
   your knowledge on the subject.
     * Physically secure your terminal and working place, realize the
       dangers of malicious "snoopers" walking around your workplace,
       having access to your terminal.
     * Logout each time your leave the terminal, or set up a time out, so
       even if you forget to logout, the system will be protected once it
       detects you're not in front of the keyboard.
     * Consider subscribing to various Security related newsletters,
       mailing lists with the idea to keep an eye on the latest
       vulnerabilities discovered.
     * Visiting the appropriate exploits related web sites is an
       important process acting as an early warning system for potential
       intrusions due to outdated or unpatched software.
     * Reading the latest Security related white papers is an essential
       step of the Administrator's self education process, which ensures
       he/she is up to date with the latest topics discussed over the
       community.
     * Limit the use of notes and papers for any sensitive information
       such as passwords, IP's and anything that might help a potential
       intruder gain access to your systems. However if you use these,
       shred and destroy them each time before you leave your work place.
       Malicious "snoopers" around the workplace might take advantage of
       this well known weakness, so limit or completely eliminate the use
       of these notes.

   2. Connecting misconfigured systems to the Internet
     * With the ever-expanding company's needs, new systems and servers
       are connected to the Internet on a regular basis, thereby
       increasing the current level of productivity or significantly
       limiting the overall expenses of the institution. However, most of
       these systems are connected to the Internet without the proper
       Security Auditing, thus being exposed to malicious attackers by
       the time a proper Security Audit is done.

   The majority of Administrators mainly rely on the fact that the system
   is new, no one knows about it, no one knows its reserved IP, and so it
   will be impossible to break into something you don't know that exists.
   However, this mode of thinking represents a threat to any
   organization. There are people or automated scripts scanning the
   Internet, or specific company's network, especially for such "test
   systems" with the idea to break into them, hide within, and use the
   system for committing further illegal activities. And how about if
   someone knew the right day, time and the IP reserved for the system,
   through advanced social engineering techniques, how about if someone
   is non-stop stealthily scanning your network for such systems? Realize
   the dangers and take the appropriate measures by following some
   recommendations listed below.
     * Conduct a complete Security Audit of the system, before you
       physically connect it to your network.
     * Make sure the system has the latest versions of the software,
       installed and securely configured.
     * If there are network tests that need to be done, consider blocking
       the access to the test system from the Internet.
     * Verify that the system you're about to connect doesn't contain any
       sensitive data yet.
     * You might be interested in how often the new system is probed for
       various vulnerabilities. Install an Intrusion Detection System,
       and I'm sure you'll be surprised at the number of scans within the
       first day.

   3. Relying on tools

   Vulnerability scanners are often used to gather information about the
   current level of Security within the network scanned. Host
   Vulnerability Scanners are very useful in checking the Security within
   the host, like file permissions, passwords policies and many other
   issues related to potential local break-in. On the other hand, Network
   Vulnerability Scanners provide the Administrator with the hacker's
   point of view on the network, highly beneficial tools as far as
   Penetration Testing is concerned. Generally, these scanners would
   eliminate half of the potential security problems within the system,
   however they're not a complete solution in order to achieve maximum
   level of Security. Admins tend to run as many Vulnerability scanners,
   as possible thinking that the more they run, the higher is the chance
   to eliminate all the problems. Wrong mode of thinking, and there're
   even cases where inappropriate scanners are ran to check the Security
   of an OS they're not specifically created for. Indeed, Vulnerability
   scanners can save you a lot of time, resources and troubles, but
   they're not a complete solution and you should not rely only on these.
   Instead, learn more about the Security of the OS you're running, so
   that you'll be able to manually (or via some sort of scripts created
   for your very specific needs) eliminate potential Security problems
   that cannot be discovered by any Vulnerability scanner.

   4. Failing to monitor the logs

   Monitoring the system's logs is an essential step in detecting ongoing
   or forthcoming intrusions. It will help you understand the common
   vulnerabilities, attackers are scanning for, so that you'll be able to
   verify all of your systems are protected against specific attack. In
   case of an intrusion, it's your system logs that might help you trace
   back the attacker, if they're not modified of course. Realize the
   benefits of regularly checking and securely storing your log files,
   while on the other hand a contribution to the scene will help
   everyone. Dshield.org is a reasonable example.

   5. Running extra and unnecessary services/scripts

   Using the company's resources and network as a personal playground for
   testing various scripts and services, is another common mistake done
   by the average Administrator. Having these scripts and extra services
   running, results in a variety of potential new entry points for a
   malicious attacker, and let's not mention if this is done from the
   main server. If you really need to test scripts, run extra services
   for personal issues, consider doing it from an isolated computer, not
   connected to the network, while still having Internet access, thus
   limiting the chances of someone discovering these services and
   scripts.

   The Top 5 Company Executive Mistakes
   Company Executives are those managing and dealing with the company's
   resources, budget, those who are responsible for leading and expanding
   the institution. Nowadays, the Internet offers amazing advantages for
   any company worldwide. The term E-business is getting more popular and
   E-business Strategy is an issue included in every Business Plan.
   However, the global connectivity represents a threat to the sensitive
   information if the company is lacking a Security strategy. I'll try to
   summarize common mistakes done by the Company Executives that could
   possibly contribute to a Security breach.

   1. Employing untrained and inexperienced experts

   Without a doubt, every highly qualified and experienced Expert is a
   valuable asset to any company's resources. However their qualification
   and professional abilities require the Executive or the one
   responsible for employing them, to have extended knowledge on the
   issue, thereby hiring the appropriate person for the right job. Having
   a basic understanding of various, if not the most popular
   certifications, ensures that you'll be able to make the best decision.
   I would advise you to take a look at gocertify.com/security in order
   to deepen your knowledge on the most popular Security/Network
   certifications available.

   2. Failing to realize to consequences of a potential security breach

   By realizing the devastating consequences of the problem, and
   eliminating the "This won't happen to us" mode of thinking, you'll be
   able to properly react instead of endangering your company's business
   activities due to lack of understanding the issue.
     * Damaging other businesses online, by contributing to a DDoS attack
     * Storing illegal information and unknowingly distributing it due to
       an undetected intrusion
     * Exposing sensitive customer's information to a malicious attacker,
       thus endangering their privacy
     * Damaging the company's image, loss of customers, loss of partner
       trust

   And it's just the tip of the iceberg, realize the consequences and
   take the appropriate actions.

   3. Not spending enough money on the Information Security issue

   Convincing a Company's Executive on the benefits or the potential
   losses of proper/improper management of the Information Security
   budget can be a difficult task. Managers tend to limit the budget to
   the minimum because of their failure to realize the potential damages
   to the company, or sometimes it's the budget that limits them.
   Internet as a global network offers unlimited and fascinating
   opportunities for every Business out there, once the Information
   Security issue is well taken care of. Consider conducting a Risk
   Analyses, so that you'll be able to distinguish critical or less
   critical systems, thus fitting in the budget, while on the other hand
   have your sensitive systems properly protected.

   4. Relying mainly on commercial tools and products

   "We use a world-known firewall, and a server based virus protection,
   so we are secured against hackers attacks" is one of the most common
   answers on "How is your company protected against hackers?" Security
   is a process, not a product. Although theoretical concepts became
   real-life solutions with the help of technology, this is not a
   complete solution for your Security. Company Executives need to have a
   basic understanding of what a firewall can, and cannot do, how useful
   and in some cases, useless a virus scanner is, thus they'll be able to
   invest in the right direction. Commercial tools and products are part
   of the process - securing your company's sensitive data, but they're
   tools that will not absolutely protect your organization.

   5. Thinking that security is a one time investment

   Security is an ever-evolving and ever-adapting concept, which requires
   monitoring, investments in both technology and most importantly, in
   people's education. New technologies appear every day, significantly
   saving you time and money, thus providing both the enterprise and the
   customers with a much reliable, yet cheaper services. However, new
   technologies and services pose different threats from those that
   you're currently protected from, which means that each time a new
   technology/service is implemented it will definitely enhance your
   productivity, but on the other hand the process requires a different
   Risk Management and the implementation of various new security
   measures.

   The Top 5 End User Mistakes
   End users are those handling the sensitive company's data on a daily
   basis. It's their decisions and activities that protect or somehow
   expose this highly critical data to a potential intruder/competitor.
   Here I'll review some of the most dangerous mistakes that end users
   tend to make.

   1. Violating the company's Security Policy

   The Company Security Policy is a document outlining the
   responsibilities of each of the staff members, having access to
   sensitive systems and information. The document is considered to be an
   inseparable part of any organization's Security Model, thus providing
   the staff members with an easy to understand way on how to protect the
   company's systems while using them. However, end users tend to violate
   the policy, thus exposing critical systems and sensitive information
   to a malicious attacker. The consequences of these activities could be
   devastating to your whole organization, that's why it is strongly
   recommended to provide everyone with explanation on why it is so
   important to follow the Security Policy, as we as discuss the
   potential damages of violating the Policy.

   2. Forwarding sensitive data to their home computers

   One of the most dangerous ways of having your sensitive data exposed
   to attackers, an activity which turns all of your Security measures
   into a completely useless process, is that of the staff member's habit
   to forward sensitive data to his/her home computer. The reasons are
   obvious, the consequences devastating. In fact, the users tend to
   forward a non-finished project or a business plan to their home
   computer, so that they'll be able to finish their work later at home,
   while on the other hand they don't realize that changing the company's
   secured environment, with their less secured home computer one,
   seriously exposes this information to an attackers/competitors. If it
   is absolutely necessary to forward data to their home computer, a
   regular Security Audits has to be conducted, ensuring their notebooks
   or home computers are protected from malicious attacks, while on the
   other hand the whole process increases the Risk level.

   3. Writing down any accounting data

   Creating and maintaining strong passwords, that's not your company's
   employees favorite process, as it's a time and nerves consuming one.
   Users hate creating passwords which they can't remember, while on the
   other hand the company's Security Policy states that this is the way a
   password should be created/maintained. Memorizing such a password is
   another issue that bothers them. In order to solve their problem,
   users tend to keep "secret" notes, under the keyboard, in their
   wallet, or anywhere else around their working place. These notes
   contain their sensitive accounting data, and using this way of
   storing, increases the chance of a Security breach due to
   irresponsibility. You should make your users aware of the potential
   problems that might occur, consider providing them with various
   password-memorizing techniques in order to reduce the current number
   of staff, keeping accounting data on notes. Play various scenarios on
   how a malicious attacker could find their note, and what would follow
   after that.

   4. Downloading from untrusted web sites

   Given the opportunity to download from the Internet, the staff members
   often abuse their privileges and even endanger the Security of their
   company. Downloading from unknown and untrusted web sites helps the
   spread of malicious programs all over the Internet. Once infected with
   any sort of malicious program (virus/trojan/worm) the infection will
   cause serious effects on the organization's functionality, and let's
   not mention the potential spread of these programs on other networks.
   Staff members should keep the downloads to the minimum, in case they
   need a specific application, it is strongly recommended to contact the
   IT Department instead of downloading the program from an untrusted web
   site. Another problem that companies face these days is the
   installation of pirated (warez) software (downloaded from the
   Internet) on their systems. Educate the staff members via any sort of
   Malicious Code Best Practices, summarize the entire problem and help
   them understand the dangers.

   5. Failing to pay serious attention to the Physical Security issue

   Having a basic understanding of various Physical Security issues will
   definitely result in much more secured workplace, and thus adequately
   protect sensitive data. Generally, the staff member's behavior while
   using the company's workstations is likely to be highly irresponsible
   and "security illiterate". Users often leave their workstations
   unattended, their screensavers rarely have proper passwords, the list
   of problems is an endless one. Educate them on various strategies
   while using the company's systems; ensure they're able to properly
   handle sensitive information having the Physical Security issue in
   mind.

   Summary
   This paper explored in-depth the most common mistakes that could lead
   to a potential Security breach. Take these very seriously and if
   necessary renovate your current Security Model. Educating your users,
   administrators and even the company's executives will increase
   everyone's level of Security Awareness, thus ensuring the secured and
   continuous functionality of the organization. The author of this paper
   can be contacted at [1]dancho.danchev@windowsecurity.com.

References

   1. mailto:dancho.danchev@windowsecurity.com
