http://w2spconf.com/2014/cfp.html

WEB 2.0 SECURITY AND PRIVACY 2014 WORKSHOP CALL FOR PAPERS

IMPORTANT DATES

Paper submission deadline: February 26, 2014 (11:59pm US-PST)
Workshop acceptance notification date: March 29, 2014
Workshop date: Sunday, May 18, 2014

Workshop paper submission web site: https://www.easychair.org/conferences/?conf=w2sp2014


W2SP brings together researchers, practitioners, web programmers, policy makers, and others interested in the latest understanding and advances in the security and privacy of the web, browsers, cloud, mobile and their eco-system. We have had seven years of successful W2SP workshops. This year, we will additionally invite selected papers to a special issue of the journal.


W2SP is held in conjunction with the IEEE Symposium on Security and privacy, which will take place from May 18-21, 2014, at the Fairmont Hotel in San Jose, California. W2SP will continue to be open-access: all papers will be made available on the workshop website, and authors will not need to forfeit their copyright.


We are seeking both short position papers (2–4 pages) and longer papers (a maximum of 10 pages). Papers must be formatted for US letter (not A4) size paper with margins of at least 3/4 inch on all sides. The text must be formatted in a two-column layout, with columns no more than 9 in. high and 3.375 in. wide. The text must be in Times font, 10-point or larger, with 12-point or larger line spacing. Authors are encouraged to use the IEEE conference proceedings templates.


The scope of W2SP 2014 includes, but is not limited to:

Analysis of Web, Cloud and Mobile Vulnerabilities
Forensic Analysis of Web, Cloud and Mobile Systems
Security Analysis of Web, Cloud and Mobile Systems
Advances in Penetration Testing
Advances in (SQL/code) Injection Attacks
Trustworthy Cloud-based, Web and Mobile services
Privacy and Reputation in Web (e.g. Social Networks), Cloud, Mobile Systems
Security and Privacy as a Service
Usable Security and Privacy
Security and Privacy Solutions for the Web, Cloud and Mobile
Identity Management, Psuedonymity and ANonymity
Security/Privacy Web Services/Feeds/Mashups
Provenance and Governance
Security and Privacy Policy Management for the Web, Cloud and Mobile
Next-Generation Web/Mobile Browser Technology
Security/Privacy Extensions and Plug-ins
Online Privacy and Security frameworks
Advertisement and Affiliate fraud
Studies on Understanding Web/Cloud/Mobile Security and Privacy
Technical Solutions for Security and Privacy legislation

Solutions for connecting the Business, Legal, Technical and Social aspects on Web/Cloud/Mobile Security and Privacy.

Technologies merging Economics with Security/Privacy
Innovative Security/Privacy Solutions for Industry Verticals

Any questions should be directed to the program chair: tgrandison (at) proficiencylabs.com.



WORKSHOP CO-CHAIRS

Larry Koved (IBM Research)
Matt Fredrikson (University of Wisconsin - Madison)

PROGRAM CHAIR

Tyrone Grandison (Proficiency Labs)

PROGRAM COMMITTEE

Aaron Massey (Georgia Institute of Technology)
Adrienne Porter Felt (Google)
Aleecia M. McDonald (Center for Internet & Society)
Alex Smolen (Twitter)
Alexander Polyakov (ERPScan)
Amine Cherrai (Amine Cherrai Consulting)
Anand Prakash (E-Billing Solutions Pvt. Ltd)
Bhavani Thuraisingham (University of Texas - Dallas)
Brad Malin (Vanderbilt University)
Carrie Gates (CA Technologies)
Christy Philip Matthew (Offcon Info Security)
Dieter Gollmann (Hamburg University of Technology)
Elena Ferrari (University of Insubria)
Gerome Miklau (University of Massachusetts - Amherst)
Hakan Hacigumus (NEC Labs)
Ilya Mironov (Microsoft Research)
James Kettle (Context Information Security)
Kimberley Hall (Security Advisory & Management Services Ltd)
Michael Franz (University of California - Irvine)
Michael Waidner (Technische Universitat Darmstadt)
Monica Chew (Mozilla)
Pierangela Samarati (University of Milan)
Rafae Bhatti (Price Waterhouse Coopers)
Reginaldo Silva (Ubercomp)
Rose Gamble (University of Tulsa)
Sabrina De Capitani di Vimercati (University of Milan)
Sean Thorpe (University of Technology - Jamaica)
Sid Stamm (Mozilla)
Simson Garfinkel (Naval Postgraduate School)
Szymon Gruszecki
Varun Bhagwan (Yahoo)
Vinnie Moscaritolo (Silent Circle)



